# Extracted Text: 0804.0266v1.pdf

_Auto-generated from PDF. Some layout elements (figures/tables) may be simplified._

arXiv:0804.0266v1  [astro-ph]  2 Apr 2008Discovery of warm and dense molecular gas
surrounding the ring nebula G79.29+0.46
J. R. Rizzo
Laboratorio de Astrof´ ısica Espacial y F´ ısica Fundamenta l, Apartado 78, E-28691
Villanueva de la Ca˜ nada, Spain
ricardo.rizzo@laeff.inta.es
F. M. Jim´ enez-Esteban
Observatorio Astron´ omico Nacional, Apartado 112, E-2880 3 Alcal´ a de Henares, Spain
f.jimenez-esteban@oan.es
and
E. Ortiz
Universidad San Pablo CEU, Urb. Montepr´ ıncipe, E-28668 Bo adilla del Monte, Spain
ortiz.eps@ceu.es
ABSTRACT
We present for the first time the detection of mid- JCO line emission in the
outskirts of anevolved massive star, which indicates the presence of warm and/or
high density molecular gas. Aiming to learn about the interplay betwee n evolved
massive stars and their surroundings, we have carried out CO J= 2→1,
J= 3→2, and13COJ= 2→1 line observations in a 4′×4′field around
the ring nebula G79.29+0.46, which is illuminated by a strong candidate t o LBV
star. Thewholefieldshowsextended predominant emissioninbothCO and13CO
J= 2→1 lines, which probably comes from the large cloud which contains the
star forming region DR15. When this large-scale emission is removed, minor
scales features become evident, particularly in the CO J= 3→2 line, strikingly
coincident with the ring nebula. The high critical density of CO J= 3→2
(some 104cm−3) gives additional support for the association with the massive
star, since high density molecular gas has more chances to survive in such a harsh
environment. This structure may have been produced by the cumu lative eﬀect
of a strong steady wind in the LBV stage or earlier, which has compre ssed the

- 2 -
surviving parent molecular cloud. In addition, immersed within this CO f eature,
we have also discovered a higher density clump (at least several ∼105cm−3),
unresolved by the telescope and probably having a higher kinetic tem perature.
Towards the clump, the presence of a jump of 14 −16 km s−1in the gas velocity
may indicate the existence of a shockfront. This clump may have bee n created by
at least one mass eruption, 103−104yr ago. Thus, this work shows that not all
the molecular gas is destroyed during massive star evolution, and co nsequently
we are dealing with a new laboratory where one can learn about the ma ss-loss
phenomena associated to the brief LBV stage.
Subject headings: circumstellar matter - ISM: general - ISM: individual
(G79.29+0.46) - ISM: molecules - ISM: structure - stars: mass loss
1. Introduction
Massive stars are the most influent sources in the dynamical and ch emical evolution
of the galactic interstellar medium (ISM). Although relatively few in nu mber, massive stars
are the most powerful, the fastest in the evolutionary paths and t he richest from a chemical
viewpoint. Mass-loss phenomena (strong and dense winds, violent m ass ejections) and a
very intense UV field provide a significant input to their surroundings , which heats, ionizes,
dissociates, blows out, shocks and enriches the ISM as a whole.
According to current evolutionary models (see, for example, Maed er & Meynet 1994;
Langer et al. 1994), the main sequence of massive stars lasts seve ral 106yr, while the Wolf-
Rayet stage takes some 105yr. All intermediate stages last typically from 103to several
104yr. Stellar winds, size, eﬀective temperature and UV flux vary durin g each phase by
orders of magnitude, while the stellar luminosity remains almost const ant. When these
changes occur, a number of diﬀerent structures in the circumste llar/interstellar gas should
be produced. Numerical simulations (Garc´ ıa-Segura et al. 1996; v an Marle et al. 2004) pre-
dict the formation of several shockfronts in the ISM at scales fro m tenths to tens of pc.
The possibility of mass eruptions at the intermediate and unstable st ages may also add a
significant contribution to the nebular mass (Smith & Owocki 2006).
So far, the study of the ISM surrounding massive stars constitut es an excellent method
to know about the evolutive history of the exciting source, becaus e it is expected that
diﬀerent evolutive stages would put their “fingerprints” in the circu mstellar material. Both
neutral and ionized gas have been widely observed in the last decade s, and today we can
recognize many interstellar bubbles associated to the Main Sequenc e (Arnal et al. 1999;

- 3 -
Cichowolski et al. 2003) and Wolf-Rayet nebulae (Miller & Chu 1993; Mo ore et al. 2000),
among other galactic structures. In recent years, the hot dust surrounding massive stars was
the subject of several near- and mid-IR observational campaign s, and we know about the
presenceofdisks, torusandshellsaroundstarsatintermediatee volutivestages(Becklin et al.
1994; O’Hara et al. 2003).
The search for molecular gas in these environments is still limited, pos sibly due to the
a-priorihypothesis by which the parent molecular cloud around an evolved ma ssive star
may have been destroyed soon after star formation. Even so, th e detected low-excitation
CO (Marston et al. 1999; Nota et al. 2002; Rizzo et al. 2003a) is giving indications that the
molecular component would represent an important contribution to the total mass of gas.
Unfortunately, the low- Jlines observed to date trace densities as low as few 103cm−3, and
the link with the stars or the circumstellar material can only be based on the morphology of
the CO structures, and not on any other physical parameter.
A special and motivating case is NGC2359. To date, this is the only Wolf -Rayet nebula
where H 2has been detected at 2 µm (St-Louis et al. 1998). Later, the global distribution of
CO has been almost simultaneously mapped using the Kitt Peak (Rizzo e t al. 2001a) and
SEST radiotelescopes (Cappa et al. 2001), showing an important am ount of molecular gas
surrounding the optical nebula. Follow-up studies have reported t he detection of complex
molecules (Rizzo et al. 2001b, 2003b) and multiple layers of rather de nse gas ( ≃104cm−3;
Rizzo et al. 2003c). The origin of the molecular gas seems related to s tages previous to
Wolf-Rayet (dynamical lifetimes tdyn∼104−105yr).
This significant result encourages the search for molecular gas in th e environs of evolved
massive stars which have not yet become Wolf-Rayet. Of those, th e luminous blue vari-
able (LBV) stars are probably the best candidates, due to the “ins tantaneous” eﬀect of their
strongwindsandspectacularmassejectionsoverthestarsurro undings(Humphreys & Davidson
1994; Nota & Clampin 1997). The nested shells observed in several c ases around LBV neb-
ulae span masses from 0.1 to 20 M ⊙, most of which come from short-lived eruptions, such as
the well known 19th century outburst of ηCar (Smith & Owocki 2006). The multiple layer
structure discovered in NGC2359, referred above, may have bee n formed during a previous
LBV stage.
A recent census provides a total of 12 confirmed galactic LBV star s and 23 candidates
of such objects (Clark et al. 2005). G79.29+0.46 appears as a stro ng LBV candidate in the
sample. Noticed for the first time by Wendker et al. (1991) in a radio m ap (1420MHz) of
the Cygnus X region, this ringlike structure looks highly symmetric, a nd has a diameter
of∼3.′2. In a pioneer paper based on continuum and Hiobservations, Higgs et al. (1994)
have shown the thermal nature of the continuum emission, and sug gested that the ringlike

- 4 -
nebula is an ionized shell of swept-up interstellar material; in addition, a possible Hibubble
is reported at a systemic velocity (LSR) of ∼ −3 km s−1. By assuming a normal gas to
dust ratio, the atomic mass is not enough to account for the extinc tion measured, and hence
a significant amount of molecular gas is predicted . After examining the IRAS High
Resolution images, Waters et al. (1996) concluded that G79.29+0.46 is a detached shell due
to an epoch of high mass loss ( ∼510−4M⊙yr−1), followed by a more quiet period. They
have estimated a shell mass of ∼14M⊙, and measured a dust temperature of 60-77K.
This picture is consistent with the LBV nature of G79.29+0.46’s excitin g star, where some
diﬀerent events of mass-loss may have occurred in the recent pas t.
The central star of G79.29+0.46 has been spectroscopically studie d at the optical and
the near-infrared wavelengths (Waters et al. 1996; Voors et al. 2 000). Its LBV classification
is supported by a high luminosity ( >105L⊙) and a currently high mass-loss rate ( >10−6M⊙
yr−1). Itsgalacticlongitudeisnotadequatetoestimateareliablekinemat icdistance; evenso,
Voors et al. (2000) derived a value of ≈2kpc. This is close to 1.7 kpc, the estimated distance
to Cygnus OB2 (Massey & Thompson 1991), a hugeOB association wh ich G79.29+0.46may
belong to. G79.29+0.46 is behind the Great Cygnus Rift, projected 9′to the north-west of
the star-forming region DR15, which causes high visual extinction ( up to 16mag; Kn¨ odlseder
2000), and where an important amount of diﬀuse CO were reported (Schneider et al. 2006,
and references therein).
The aim of this work is to detect and to make a first morphological and dynamical
analysis of the molecular gas associated to G79.29+0.46. Below we pre sent the results of
surveys in the rotational lines of CO J= 2→1 and 3 →2, and13COJ= 2→1
surrounding the LBV ring nebula. The obtained results encourage t o make further studies
about dynamics, excitation and the possible relationship between th e molecular gas detected
and the ring nebula.
2. Observations
TheobservationsweremadewiththeSubmillimeter Telescope(SMT), locatedonMount
Graham, Arizona. The telescope is a 10.4 m diameter primary with a nut ating secondary.
Design, optics and structural aspects of the telescope have bee n extensively described by
Baars et al. (1999). The single-polarization receiver SIS-230 was u sed to observe the CO
and13COJ= 2→1 line emission; on the other hand, the CO J= 3→2 line was observed
usingthedual-channelSIS-345receiver. Thethreelinesweremap pedinseveral ∼4′×4′fields
around G79.29+0.46, using on-the-fly mode, with a fixed position (empty of line emission)
as the reference. Several on-the-fly maps were later averaged in order to get a final rmsas

- 5 -
low as possible. The scanning directions and starting positions were d iﬀerent each time to
reduce stripping. The Table 1 summarizes some parameters of the o bservations; for each
line, the table indicates the frequency, angular resolution (HPBW), main-beam eﬃciency
and final rmsof the maps.
The receivers were tuned for double-sideband operation, assumin g a sideband ratio
of 1 for the system temperature calibration. The receivers were c alibrated with ambient-
temperature and liquid nitrogen-cooled absorbing loads to determin e the receiver noise tem-
perature; calibration of the final data have uncertainties below 20 %. These measurements
were made each time a receiver was tuned and at intervals of a few ho urs thereafter. Sys-
tem temperatures were measured with the standard sky/ambient temperature load method
(Kutner & Ulich 1981). Calibrations were performed every 15-20 min utes to track variations
inatmosphericopacity. Typicalsingle-sidebandsystemtemperatu resduringtheobservations
were in the range 250 −400K for the 1.3mm lines and 1200 −2000K for the 0.8 mm line, de-
pending on the elevation and atmospheric opacity. Two acousto-op tic spectrometers (AOS)
have been used as backends. The AOS have 2048 channels, and a fr equency resolution of
480 kHz, providing a velocity resolution of 0.6 (0.4) km s−1in the 1.3mm (0.8mm) bands,
and bandwidths wide enough for galactic emission. The pointing was ch ecked within 2hr on
a planet or other bright continuum source using the integrated line in tensity. Corrections
to the expected positions for the pointing model were not more tha n 4′′in either azimuth
or elevation. Planet observations were also used to check the main b eam eﬃciency at the
observed frequencies, which are also listed in Table 1. Throughout a ll the paper, the tem-
peratures are on a main-beam scale ( TMB), and the velocities refer to the Local Standard of
Rest system ( VLSR).
3. Results: emission maps around G79.29+0.46
Figure 1 shows a panel of the emission maps corresponding to the CO J= 2→1 line.
To provide a first-look morphological comparison with G79.29+0.46, t he circle in the center
of each map roughly traces the external border of the ring nebula (Higgs et al. 1994). At
first sight, we note that large-scale emission dominates all the obse rved field, mostly at the
2.4 km s−1map. Despite of this, some minor-scale features can be observed, such as the
unresolved arc at the southwest, around ( −80”,−110”). This arc is present in a wide range
of velocities, and bounds part of the ring nebula. The inner part of t he circle is filled by
some low-level emission, especially in the range -3 to +5 km s−1. The emission at the first
and last maps do not appear morphologically linked to the ring nebula.
Figure 2 sketches the13COJ= 2→1 emission in a similar fashion to Fig. 1. With the

- 6 -
aim of reducing the map noise, a 2-D hanning filtering has been applied t o build the figure.
This filtering slightly reduces the angular resolution of the map down t o 45”. In general, the
emission of this isotopomer is well correlated with the most intense CO emission in Fig. 1.
Similarly, besides the most intense emission at the southeastern cor ner of the observed field,
minor scale feature are also noticed. A systematic deviation of the c ontours is visible toward
the north, north-east, and south-west of the plotted circle. An other outstanding feature of
Fig. 2 is the lack of emission in the first, second, and last maps; as this behaviour can not
be explained merely by the sensitivity of the map, it clearly indicates th at the CO opacity
is relatively higher at the central velocities (i.e., in the range −3 to +10 km s−1), where the
isotopic ratio [CO]/[13CO] is lower, when compared with the more extreme velocities plotted
in Fig. 2.
The emission maps of the CO J= 3→2 line are shown in Fig. 3. Due to a higher
velocity resolution, the twelve maps of the figure span the same velo city range as those of
Figs. 1 and 2. With the exception of the last map (11.4 km s−1), the emission concentrates
on the central velocities, mainly on the six central maps. Some exte nded emission appears
at -0.5 and 1.2 km s−1, while in the following three maps the CO J= 3→2 emission is
concentrated outside the ring nebula. Especially outstanding is aga in the southwest feature;
it has the highest level of the maps (above 10K on a TMBscale), remains unresolved at 345
GHz, and is widely extended in velocity.
4. Linking the CO to G79.29+0.46: distance, morphology, kin ematics
The field of G79.29+0.46 is immersed into Cyg X, a major star-forming r egion which
contains large amounts of molecular gas having densities of some 103cm−3(Schneider et al.
2006). More specifically, G79.29+0.46 is projected close in the sky (o nly 9′) to the smaller
star-forming region DR15, although it is not clear if they are physica lly connected. DR15
is located at 1 .7±0.3kpc (Schneider et al. 2006). The distance to G79.29+0.46, howeve r,
is hard to obtain with similar precision due to the uncertainties in the st ellar parameters,
dependent on its classification. In this sense, Voors et al. (2000) h as made an important
contribution, providing a distance in the range 1 to 4kpc, with a likely v alue of 2kpc, close
to the distance of DR15.
Thus, the CO emission presumably linked to G79.29+0.46 are expected to be heavily
contaminated by foreground/background emission from DR15 or C ygX as a whole. More-
over, contribution from the solar neighbourhood does not have to be disregarded (mostly
in theJ= 2→1 lines), due to the velocities involved, close to cero. As we have seen in
Figs. 1, 2, and 3, most of the CO emission is dominated by large-scale e mission which fills all

- 7 -
the mapped area. From a visual inspection to the low resolution maps of Oka et al. (2001),
we can relate our large-scale CO emission -which increases towards t he southeast- with the
molecular cloud around DR15. Furthermore, in the wide field MSX and S CUBA images of
Redman et al. (2003) we can clearly associate the CO emission to the h igher column densi-
ties of dust. In principle, we can therefore think about the large-s cale emission detected in
our maps as arising from the foreground/background emission ass ociated to the molecular
cloud where DR15 is embedded.
It is also expected that the CO gasassociated to the ring nebula sho uld have minor-scale
features, and be morphologically connected to the ring nebula. Thu s, in order to propose a
link between theobserved CO andG79.29+0.46, we should lookatthe s maller-scale features.
In this sense, the southwestern clump is the most prominent featu re, visible in all the maps.
Other minor scale features can be inferred by the local deviations o f the contours already
referred to in Sect. 3. In order to better distinguish the local fea tures presumably associated
to the ring nebula, we have removed a plane emission (i.e., a polynomial o f order 1 in both
celestial coordinates) for each velocity channel, in the three obse rved lines. These planes
have been fitted by a least-square method to the whole field, taking the external zone of
the field as input, and assuming that every feature outside ≈160′′is purely associated to
the foreground/background emission. The results are presente d in Fig. 4, where integrated
velocity maps in two diﬀerent velocity ranges (+1 .3 to +4.8 km s−1at panels 4a to 4c;
−3.0 to−1.3 km s−1at panels 4d to 4f) are shown for each line. Both the positive and
negative velocity ranges have been selected to better show the min or-scale features of the
CO emission. The molecular emission is shown by contours, superpose d on an ISO 25 µm-
image in grayscale (Trams et al. 1997).
The distribution of the background-substracted emission is now clo sely following the
ring-shaped geometry of the infrared nebula. At the positive veloc ity range (Figs. 4a to 4c)
the most prominent feature is the southwest clump, clearly visible in b oth CO lines. The CO
J= 3→2 line emission also has lower level contour emission bordering the exte rnal part of
the nebula. The lack of a13CO counterpart of the southwestern clump may be due to the
background removal method, because the intensity of the local f eature may be comparable
to the fluctuations of the fitted large-scale plane. Strikingly, at ne gative velocities (Figs. 4d
to 4f), the emission of the three lines closely match the infrared neb ula, especially in the
western half of the ring. The peak of the emission is again at the sout hwest, but at an inner
position with respect to the southwestern clump at positive velocitie s.
The morphological coincidence of the small-scale features of the CO emission with the
infrared ring nebula encourages their mutual association. At the b est of our knowledge, the
COJ= 1→0 andJ= 2→1 observations presented in AGCar is the only LBV nebula

- 8 -
where a molecular counterpart has been reported (Nota et al. 200 2). In that paper, however,
no maps were constructed and it is hard to determine if the morpholo gy of the CO resembles
or not that found in our data. Moreover, the low- Jlines may contain important amounts of
diﬀuse, background or foreground gas. In G79.29+0.46, the small- scale features that more
clearly are correlated to the ring nebula are those of the J= 3→2 line (Fig. 4c and 4f),
and they are also the most intense. If we also take into account the higher critical density
of theJ= 3→2 line (some 104cm−3), compared to the low- Jlines, we can think about a
scenariowherehighdensitymoleculargashasmorechancestosurv iveinharshenvironments,
dominated by strong and variable stellar winds and UV fields from the m assive progenitor
star.
The kinematics of the local gas was studied by position-velocity maps across selected
strips. On many of them, we could not detect any sign of expansion o r rotation of the CO
gas. The dominant velocities across the field are from −2 to 0 km s−1, with almost no
systematic variations or gradients. This is, on the other hand, the velocity range where most
of the low-resolution emission was reported as arising from DR15 (Ok a et al. 2001). An
outstanding exception to this general trend is shown in Fig. 5. This fi gure was constructed
by selecting the strip indicated in Fig. 4c, along a northeast to south west direction (exactly
45◦from north to east). The slice was selected to pass through the so uthwest arc (at ∼260′′
in Fig. 5), where a sudden broadening occurs. This broadening grow s up to 14 km s−1(from
−2 to +12 km s−1), and is limited to an angular extension comparable to the beamsize. I t is
also noticeable that the CO velocity shifts when the strip passes fro m the inner to the outer
region of the nebula, i.e., when passes through the southwest arc.
The feature displayed in Fig. 5 is a dynamical indicator of a low-velocity shock, acting
beyond the ionized ring nebula at a projected velocity of 14 km s−1. This assumption is
supported by two facts: firstly, the region aﬀected by the broad ening is relatively thin,
because it is unresolved by our beam; and secondly, there is no smoo th variations of the
velocity between the inner and the outer regions. An important, ad ditional argument is
provided by the fact that there is no CO emission arising from DR15 or other close objects,
above 10 km s−1; in this sense, the Fig. 4c of Oka et al. (2001) is ellocuent, showing no
features at velocities above 10 km s−1. In other words, the CO velocity outside the ring
nebula is locally exceptional, and it may only be explained by some kind of in teraction with
the LBV-candidate star. The presence of shocked gas close to th e hot star encourages its
association and explains its own existence, because the (relatively) recent mass eruptions
and variable winds after the main sequence may have produced some sort of features like
the ones recognized in the molecular circumstellar gas.
As were mentioned in the introduction, an increasing number of hydr odynamical sim-

- 9 -
ulations are predicting the presence of several shocks in the envir ons of evolved massive
stars (Garc´ ıa-Segura et al. 1996; van Marle et al. 2004). This sho cked region is certainly
of particular interest, because it may constitute a good laborator y to test these theoretical
predictions. This is especially true when we take into account the mult iple layers reported
by Rizzo et al. (2003c) surrounding a Wolf-Rayet nebula (NGC2359) , where a previous LBV
stage was assigned as the responsible of such layers. The chemistr y of the molecular gas in
the southwestern clump may also be of particular interest, with a sc enario characterized by
a shocked cloud, and close to a highly-obscured, hot, and evolved s tar.
The velocity range of the unshocked CO (from −3 to +1 km s−1) is -within the un-
certainties of the observations and the expected dispersion- coin cident with the Hihole’s
systemic velocity reported by Higgs et al. (1994). This Hicounterpart may represent the
main sequence signature of the star progenitor, as in many other c ases of the Galaxy (see,
for example, Arnal et al. 1999; Rizzo et al. 2001a; Cichowolski et al. 2003). These velocities
do not diﬀer too much to those of the metal lines (Voors et al. 2000) and Brα(Waters et al.
1996) from the star1.
Below we discuss the particular physical conditions of the molecular g as linked to
G79.29+0.46, and also provide some quantitave arguments about its possible origin.
5. Discussion
5.1. Physical parameters: the LVG approach
As we mentioned in the earlier sub-section, the detected molecular g as should have
physical conditions which are diﬀerent to those of the general ISM . The detected CO may
simply be interstellar gas accumulated by the stellar wind, the results of several ejecta, or
the relics of the parent molecular cloud, aﬀected by the destructiv e action of UV radiation
and/or pushing wind. An estimate of the molecular mass, together w ith the neutral atomic
and the ionized gas masses, may complete the energetic balance rela ted to the mechanical
input from the exciting star. Other local parameters, such as the gas temperature or the
density, will help to better describe the physical conditions in the st udied region.
In a wide variety of galactic scenarios, CO was found to be close to LT E but having a
high opacity (Lequeux 2005). From the most common values of the C O to13COJ= 2→1
1Note that, in both papers, the conversion from heliocentric to LSR reference systems were made in the
wrong sense, and consequently the star and nebular velocities res ult to be ∼34 km s−1higher than the
published ones.

- 10 -
line ratio (between 3 and 5 when13CO is detected) we confirm that both CO lines are
optically thick. Furthermore, the high intensity of the CO J= 3→2 line (comparable or
even higher than the J= 2→1 line), indicates that we are dealing with densities ( n(H2))
above 104cm−3, and rotational temperatures ( Trot) of 40K or more.
We can make a first approach to the physical conditions of the CO by using a LVG code
to predict the observed intensities and line ratios. In order to comp are the LVG modelling
with the observations, we have used the line-integrated maps alrea dy shown in Fig. 4 in the
two velocity intervals. The CO J= 3→2 maphas been convolved to the J= 2→1 angular
resolution to work with a directly comparable TMBscale. The CO to13COJ= 2→1 line
ratio varies from 2 to 8, while the CO J= 3→2 to 2→1 line ratio (hereafter referred to
asRexc) varies from 0.3 to 1.7 on a TMBscale in both velocity intervals.
After analyzing the emission in all the lines, as well as the line ratios, we have proceeded
with the LVG modelling by choosing characteristic regions within the ob served field. These
regions are indicated in Fig. 6, and the meanings are as follows:
Region A: It contains the most intense emission from the southwestern clump in the (1.3,
4.8) km s−1velocity interval. This region may have representative values for bo th the total
mass and n(H2) of the emission at positive velocities.
Region B: This region corresponds to the maximum Rexcin both velocity intervals, and
points out the maximum densities expected in the whole area.
Region C: This region comprises most of the emission at negative velocities (exc luding region
B), coincident with the ring nebula. It may represent the most commo n physical conditions
in the velocity interval (-3, -1.3) km s−1, and may contain most of the mass.
Region D: This is a control region, with no significant features associated to t he ring nebula.
This is built just to compare the results of LVG modelling with the other regions, and to
check the validity of the method.
The four regions defined are sketched in Fig. 6 superposed to the d istribution of Rexcin
the(1.3, 4.8)kms−1velocity intervalingreyscale, andtosomecontoursoftheCO J= 3→2
emission in both velocity intervals (see caption). Note that greysca le peaks at region B and
not at region A, where the line intensity is higher for positive velocities . Qualitatively, region
B might have a higher density but lower mass than the region A, where we have found the
CO absolute peak and a high (but not the highest) Rexc.
We have modelled the CO emission for diﬀerent values of the kinetic tem perature ( Tk),
namely 40, 70, and 100K. For a given Tk, we have used the13COJ= 2→1 line intensity
andRexcas input, and thus predicted the13CO column density ( N(13CO)) and n(H2).

- 11 -
According to the method, N(13CO) is most sensitive to the line intensity, and does not vary
too much with Tk(Lequeux 2005). The obtained values for N(13CO) and n(H2) were later
introduced to obtain the line opacities and excitation temperatures . The CO column density
(N(CO)) was obtained from N(13CO) by assuming a CO to13CO relative abundance of 70
(Wilson & Matteucci 1992). Finally, the total molecular mass was der ived from N(CO), by
assuming a CO abundance of 8 10−5, a distance of 1.7 kpc, and including the correction for
the presence of He and other elements. The results from the LVG m odelling are summarized
in Table 2. For each velocity interval, we have indicated the region, its angular size, the
assumed Tk, and the obtained values for n(H2),N(CO), and the total molecular mass.
Finally, the last column provided a brief description of each region.
The visual absorption AVmeasured towards G79.29+0.46 varies from 12 (Trams et al.
1999) to 15 mag (Voors et al. 2000). By assuming a crude gas-to-d ust ratio of
N(HI)+2N(H2)∼1021AV
we derive N(H2)≤6−7.5 1021cm−2. For a normal CO abundance (8 10−5), a general
N(CO) value of ≤5−6 1017cm−2is expected. The values of N(CO) obtained in our
control regions are one order of magnitude lower, which may indicat e that most of the local
gas is in atomic phase (both neutral and ionized). Moreover, the de nsities of the control
regions are the lowest of the table, which again reinforces the prop osed link of the molecular
gas characterized by the regions A, B, and C. While the densities of r egion D are around
103cm−3, the values for the other regions show and enhancement of one or two orders of
magnitude.
The total mass at positive velocities rounds 8M ⊙, roughly distributed between clumps
A (5M ⊙) and B (3M ⊙). At negative velocities, a total mass of 5M ⊙is computed, dis-
tributed between the clump B (1.5M ⊙) and the northwestern arc (3.5M ⊙). The missing
mass of the method, mostly due to the reduction of the velocity inte rvals and to the selected
regions, is in any case lower than 2M ⊙. These masses fall within the range of those ex-
pected in LBV outbursts (Smith & Owocki 2006), and to other verifi ed mass eruptions like
inηCarina (Smith et al. 2003), or PCyg (Meaburn 2001). Although the la ck of symmetry
of the associated CO is puzzling, the hypothesis of mass ejections a s the origin of such struc-
tures is worth to be considered in the future. A follow-up study sho uld be carried out to
observe other emission lines at higher frequencies or larger telesco pes, capable of resolving
the southwestern structure. The dominant physical processes may also be inferred by getting
information from molecular tracers of shocks and PDRs.
The assumed Tkis surely not uniform along the whole field: probably, the emission
at negative velocities is better described by higher Tkthan the regions emitting at positive
velocities. As expected, the column densities are almost independen t fromTk, and the

- 12 -
variations are well below the observational uncertainties. The13COJ= 2→1 line was
found to be optically thin in all cases. However, both CO lines are optic ally thick; the
J= 3→2 line systematically has a larger opacity than the J= 2→1 line, which
may result in larger values of Rexc, and consequently n(H2). The13COJ= 2→1 line
is subthermally excited in all cases. For positive velocities, the LVG mo delling needs an
excitation temperature above 40K, indicating a Tkwell above such value. In fact, fitting
was impossible in region B for Tk= 40K.
5.2. On the origin of the detected molecular gas
The high densities found in the field, particularly in the regions A and B, strengthen the
hypothesisofseveral shockfrontsactinguponthecircumstellar mediumaroundG79.29+0.46.
A set of shockfronts is the natural consequence of the presenc e of diﬀerent wind regimes
during star evolution, and the probable occurence of mass eruptio ns (Garc´ ıa-Segura et al.
1996; van Marle et al. 2004). So far, it is important to associate the diﬀerent features with
specific evolutive stages of the star progenitor.
We can deal with a rough estimate of the age of the high-density gas , by taking into
account the morphology and kinematics presented above. For an a ssumed distance of 1.7
kpc, the southwestern clump is projected at a distance of ∼1 pc. A lower limit for the shock
velocity would be 14 km s−1, the magnitude of the “jump” in Fig. 5. By adopting these
values, a crude estimate of the dynamical time would be
tdyn<R
Vshock=1 pc
14 kms−1≃7×104yr.
This value of tdynshould be regarded as a loose upper limit for the age of the shock, ma inly
due to the fact that: ( i) the present shock velocity may be higher than 14 km s−1, because
this is the most conservative value, and just a radial projection of the real shock velocity;
(ii) the shock might have started with values of several hundreds of km s−1, and then have
been decelerated when travelling into the circumstellar gas. If this w ere the case, the real age
would be one order of magnitude lower. By looking at the high regularit y of the torus-like
nebula, a reasonable value for the age of the structure may be belo w 104yr, perhaps some
103yr.
The youth of this structure allows us to associate the molecular sho ckfront with the
actual LBV phase, which might have experienced several episodes of mass ejection in the
near past. As the material is indeed more disperse than, for examp le,ηCarina, we can
speculate about two possibilities: ( i) G79.29+0.46 is older than ηCarina, and hence has
had more time to disperse its surroundings; or ( ii) the energy involved in G79.29+0.46 is

- 13 -
greater than in ηCarina. The first hypothesis seems more plausible, because of the s ize of
the circumstellar material associated to G79.29+0.46, and because recent, violent eruptions
ofηCarina have been recorded in the 19th century. Even so, it is intere sting to explore both
possibilities, as well as to go deep into a comparison of both objects, in order to shed some
light on the interplay between these type of stars and their outskir ts.
6. Conclusions
A region of 4′×4′in the field of the ring nebula G79.29+0.46 has been mapped in the
COJ= 2→1 and 3→2, and the13COJ= 2→1 emission lines, with a maximum angular
resolution of 24′′, equivalent to ∼0.2 pc at an assumed distance of 1.7 kpc. We report for the
first time the detection of a mid- JCO emission line from the surroundings of a LBV nebula.
Provided the excitation conditions of the CO J= 3→2 line, the studied gas is presumably
warm (more than 33K) and dense (above some 104cm−3). As a first result of this work,
it is shown that not all the molecular gas is destroyed during massive s tar evolution, and
consequently we are dealing with a new laboratory where one can lear n about the mass-loss
phenomena associated to the brief LBV stage.
TheCOemissionisdominatedbylargescalefeatures, whichuniformlyin creasestowards
the southeast; this background/foreground emission is probably associated to DR15, due to
its close location and the velocity range of emission. Minor scale featu res, however, show a
morphology completely diﬀerent, dominated by a large arc which coinc ides with more than
half of the infrared ring nebula, and bounding it at a projected dista nce of up to 1pc. This
emission is particularly intense (in the J= 3→2 line) towards the southwest, where a more
conspicuous zone is embedded. Moreover, there is a shockfront o f a projected velocity of 14
km s−1acting precisely in this southwestern clump.
We have predicted the observed line emission by LVG modelling. A minimum Tkof
40K was determined in an extended area which have densities of the o rder of 104cm−3.
Immersed within this plateau, there are two outstanding clumps (re gions A and B), which
have densities well above 105cm−3and probably a higher Tk.
The total molecular mass associated to the nebula is ∼13 to 15M ⊙, while the clump
masses areabout5 M ⊙each. Most of thegasmay result fromthe surviving parent molecula r
cloud, later compressed by steady stellar winds and radiation press ure. The origin of the
clumps may be diﬀerent, and we can not roule out the existence of re cent mass eruptions.
The higher density, the presence of a shockfront and the mass inv olved may be indicators of
violent events, produced ∼104yr ago, or less. This fact, together with the high symmetry

- 14 -
of the nebula, points to an LBV origin of the feature.
This study ofthemolecular component directly associatedtothe LB Vstagemay helpto
understand the recent past of G79.29+0.46, and therefore the e volutive mechanisms of this
kind of objects. So far, it is worth making more observational eﬀor ts in order to resolve the
emission, particulary in the clump. The diﬀerences between regions A and B are puzzling,
and may indicate the existence of more than one mass eruption in the recent past of the
progenitor of G79.29+0.46. A follow-up study of complex molecules sh ould also be carried
out, because they can provide information about the physical par ameters in detail. The
chemistry of the molecular gas in this region may also be of particular in terest, with a
scenario characterized by a shocked cloud, and close to a highly-ob scured, hot, and evolved
star. Anabundancestudyofsuchmolecules maypointtothedomina nt emissionmechanisms
in the zone, which can be related to the ionized and atomic neutral ga s, together with the
hot circumstellar dust. Finally, other surveys of CO emission in LBVs a nd other evolved
massive stars will also help to understand how frequent the mass er uptions are in this class
of objects, and how important they are when compared to the ste ady high mass loss and to
the UV destructive radiation.
We are grateful to the technical staﬀ of SMT for their kind assista nce during both the
remote and on-site observations. We also wish to acknowledge the a nonymous referee by
his/her useful comments, which greatly improved the paper. Data reduction and analysis
were done using the GILDAS package (http://www.iram.fr/IRAMFR/ GILDAS). This work
is supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia y T´ ecnica, through grant AYA2003-06473.
The SMT is operated by the Arizona Radio Observatory (ARO), Stew ard Observatory,
University of Arizona.
Facilities: ARO(SMT).

- 15 -
REFERENCES
Arnal, E. M., Cappa, C. E., Rizzo, J. R., & Cichowolski, S. 1999, AJ, 118 , 1798
Baars, J. W. M., Martin, R. N., Mangum, J. G., McMullin, J. P., & Peters, W. L. 1999,
PASP, 111, 627
Becklin, E. E., Zuckerman, B., McLean, I. S., & Geballe, T. R. 1994, Ap J, 430, 774
Cappa, C. E., Rubio, M., & Goss, W. M. 2001, AJ, 121, 2664
Cichowolski, S., Arnal, E. M., Cappa, C. E., Pineault, S., & St-Louis, N. 2 003, MNRAS,
343, 47
Clark, J. S., Larionov, V. M., & Arkharov, A. 2005, A&A, 435, 239
Garc´ ıa-Segura, G., Mac Low, M.-M., Langer, N. 1996, A&A, 305, 22 9
Higgs, L. A., Wendker, H. J., & Landecker, T. L. 1994, A&A, 291, 29 5
Humphreys, R. M., & Davidson, K. 1994, PASP, 106, 1025
Kn¨ odlseder, J. 2000, A&A, 360, 539
Kutner, M. L., & Ulich, B. L. 1981, ApJ, 250, 341
Langer, N., Hamann, W.-R., Lennon, M., Najarro, F., Pauldrach, A. W . A., & Puls, J. 1994,
A&A, 290, 819
Lequeux, J. 2005, The interstellar medium. Astronomy and astrop hysics library, Berlin:
Springer, 2005
Maeder, A., & Meynet, G. 1994, A&A, 287, 803
Marston, A. P., Welzmiller, J., Bransford, M. A., Black, J. H., & Bergma n, P. 1999, ApJ,
518, 769
Massey, P., & Thompson, A. B. 1991, AJ, 101, 1408
Meaburn, J. 2001, ASP Conf. Ser. 233: P Cygni 2000: 400 Years o f Progress, 233, 253
Miller, G. J., & Chu, Y.-H. 1993, ApJS, 85, 137
Moore, B. D., Hester, J. J., & Scowen, P. A. 2000, AJ, 119, 2991

- 16 -
Nota, A., & Clampin, M. 1997, ASP Conf. Ser. 120: Luminous Blue Varia bles: Massive
Stars in Transition, 120, 303
Nota, A., Pasquali, A., Marston, A. P., Lamers, H. J. G. L. M., Clampin, M., & Schulte-
Ladbeck, R. E. 2002, AJ, 124, 2920
O’Hara, T. B., Meixner, M., Speck, A. K., Ueta, T., & Bobrowsky, M. 20 03, ApJ, 598, 1255
Oka, T., et al. 2001, ApJ, 558, 176
Redman, R. O., Feldman, P. A., Wyrowski, F., Cˆ ot´ e, S., Carey, S. J., & Egan, M. P. 2003,
ApJ, 586, 1127
Rizzo, J. R., Mart´ ın-Pintado, J., & Mangum, J. G. 2001a, A&A, 366, 146
Rizzo, J. R., Mart´ ın-Pintado, J., & Henkel, C. 2001b, ApJ, 553, L18 1
Rizzo, J. R., Mart´ ın-Pintado, J., & Desmurs, J.-F. 2003a, IAU Symp osium, 212, 740
Rizzo, J. R., Mart´ ın-Pintado, J., & Desmurs, J.-F. 2003b, IAU Symp osium, 212, 742
Rizzo, J. R., Mart´ ın-Pintado, J., & Desmurs, J.-F. 2003c, A&A, 411 , 465
Schneider, N., Bontemps, S., Simon, R., Jakob, H., Motte, F., Miller, M., Kramer, C., &
Stutzki, J. 2006, A&A, 458, 855
Smith, N., Gehrz, R. D., Hinz, P. M., Hoﬀmann, W. F., Hora, J. L., Mamaj ek, E. E., &
Meyer, M. R. 2003, AJ, 125, 1458
Smith, N., & Owocki, S. P. 2006, ApJ, 645, L45
St-Louis, N., Doyon, R., Chagnon, F., & Nadeau, D. 1998, AJ, 115, 2 475
Trams, N. R., Voors, R. H. M., & Waters, L. B. F. M. 1997, Ap&SS, 25 5, 195
Trams, N. R., van Tuyll, C. I., Voors, R. H. M., de Koter, A., Waters, L . B. F. M., &
Morris, P. W. 1999, LNP Vol. 523: IAU Colloq. 169: Variable and Non-s pherical
Stellar Winds in Luminous Hot Stars, 523, 71
van Marle, A. J., Langer, N., & Garc´ ıa-Segura, G. 2004, RMA&A Con f. Ser., 22, 136
Voors, R. H. M., Geballe, T. R., Waters, L. B. F. M., Najarro, F., & Lam ers, H. J. G. L. M.
2000, A&A, 362, 236

- 17 -
Waters, L. B. F. M., Izumiura, H., Zaal, P. A., Geballe, T. R., Kester, D . J. M., & Bontekoe,
T. R. 1996, A&A, 313, 866
Wendker, H. J., Higgs, L. A., & Landecker, T. L. 1991, A&A, 241, 55 1
Wilson, T. L., & Matteucci, F. 1992, A&A Rev., 4, 1
This preprint was prepared with the AAS L ATEX macros v5.2.

- 18 -
Table 1. Observational parameters
line frequency HPBW ηMBrmsa
(GHz) (′′) (K)
COJ= 2→1 230.5380000 36 0.85 0.4
13COJ= 2→1 220.3986765 38 0.86 0.2
COJ= 3→2 345.7959899 24 0.60 0.6
aApproximate rmsof the final maps, in T∗
Rscale

- 19 -
Table 2. Physical parameters in selected regions
Region Area Tkn(H2)N(CO) Mass Description
(ster) (K) (cm−3) (cm−2) (M ⊙)
Positive velocities: from 1.3 to 4.8 km s−1:
A 5.5 10−840 2.4 1051.4 10175.2 Southwestern clump.
70 1.7 1041.2 10174.5 CO J= 3→2 peak.
100 9.1 1031.2 10174.5
B 3.9 10−840>4 1068.3 10162.7Rexcpeak.
70 1.3 1059.5 10163.1
100 2.0 1048.2 10162.7
D 7.6 10−840 7.7 1035.1 10162.5 “Control” region.
70 4.1 1035.0 10162.5
100 2.5 1034.9 10162.4
Negative velocities: from -3.0 to -1.3 km s−1:
B 3.9 10−840 2.7 1044.7 10161.6 CO J= 3→2 and
70 8.8 1034.5 10161.5Rexcpeaks.
100 6.4 1034.6 10161.5
C 4.0 10−740 1.7 1041.3 10163.4 Most extended
70 6.5 1031.3 10163.4 emission, coincident
100 4.8 1031.3 10163.5 with ring nebula.
D 7.6 10−840 6.4 1032.7 10161.3 “Control” region.
70 3.2 1032.6 10161.2
100 2.2 1032.6 10161.2

- 20 -

- 21 -
Fig. 1.- CO J= 2→1 emission maps in the field of G79.29+0.46. Central velocities (in
km s−1) are indicated on top of each map, and correspond to the mean of t wo consecutive
channels. Starting and spacing contours are 0.6K (in TMBscale). Greyscale (in K) and beam
size are indicated in the top left map. The central circle, ∼4′in diameter, roughly sketches
the external border of the ring nebula. Equatorial coordinates ( J2000.0) are oﬀsets from the
exciting star of G79.29+0.46

- 22 -
Fig. 2.- The same as for Fig. 1, but for the13COJ= 2→1 line. Starting and spacing
contours are 0.25K

- 23 -
Fig. 3.- The same as for Figs. 1 and 2, but for the CO J= 3→2 line. Contours are
spaced by 1.5K, starting in 3K

- 24 -
Fig. 4.- Background-removed maps of the three lines observed, int egrated in two diﬀerent
velocity ranges: from 1.3 to 4.8 km s−1(panelsatoc), and from −3.0 to−1.3 km s−1
(panelsdtof). Lines are indicated at the top left of each map. Contours are ove rlaid to an
ISO 25µm image of the nebula (Trams et al. 1997). Contours start and spac ing are 1.6, 1.0,
4.4, 1.0, 0.4, and 1.0 Kkm s−1fromatof, respectively. The diagonal line on map cmarks
the strip selected for the position-velocity diagram shown in Fig. 5

- 25 -
Fig. 5.- Position-velocity diagram of the CO J= 3→2 line emission in the field of
G79.29+0.46. The direction of the slice is traced by the line in Fig. 4c, or iented 45◦from
northeast to southwest. The notable broadening near 260′′corresponds to the southwest arc
just beyond the nebula (see text)

- 26 -
Fig. 6.- Regions selected for the LVG modelling, indicated by letters A, B, C and D.
Greyscale corresponds to the CO J= 3→2 to 2→1 line ratio ( Rexc) in the velocity
interval (+1.3, +4.8) km s−1. Black, thin contours correspond to the CO J= 3→2 line
emission in the same velocity interval. Grey, heavy contours trace t he same but in the
velocity interval (-3, -1.3) km s−1. All data have been convolved to 36′′of angular resolution
