# Extracted Text: stu296.pdf

_Auto-generated from PDF. Some layout elements (figures/tables) may be simplified._

MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014) doi:10.1093/mnras/stu296
Advance Access publication 2014 March 23
The candidate luminous blue variable G79.29 +0.46: a comprehensive
study of its ejecta through a multiwavelength analysis
C. Agliozzo,1,2‹A. Noriega-Crespo,3G. Umana,4N. Flagey,5C. Buemi,4
A. Ingallinera,4C. Trigilio4and P. Leto4
1Departamento de Ciencias Fisicas, Universidad Andres Bello, Avda. Republica 252, Santiago, Chile
2Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Sezione Astrofisica, Universit `a degli studi di Catania, via S. Sofia 64, I-95123, Catania, Italy
3Infrared Processing and Analysis Center, California Institute of Technology, 1200 East California Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
4INAF Osservatorio Astrofisico di Catania, via S. Sofia 78, I-95123, Catania, Italy
5Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA
Accepted 2014 February 10. Received 2014 February 7; in original form 2013 November 23
ABSTRACT
We present a multiwavelength analysis of the nebula around the candidate luminous blue
variable G79.29 +0.46. The study is based on our radio observations performed at the Expanded
Very Large Array and at the Green Bank Telescope and on archival infrared data sets, including
recent images obtained by the Herschel Space Observatory . We confirm that the radio central
object is characterized by a stellar wind and we derive a current mass-loss rate of about
1.4×10−6M⊙yr−1. We find the presence of a dusty compact envelope close to the star, with
a temperature between ∼40 and 1200 K. We estimate for the outer ejecta an ionized gas mass
of 1.51 M ⊙and a warm (60-85 K) dust mass of 0.02 M ⊙. Diagnostics of the far-infrared
spectra indicate the presence of a photodissociation region around the ionized gas. Finally,
we model the nebula with the photoionization code CLOUDY , using as input parameters those
estimated from our analysis. We find for the central star a luminosity of 105.4L⊙and an
effective temperature of 20.4 kK.
Key words: stars: early-type - stars: evolution - stars: mass-loss - ISM: bubbles - infrared:
ISM - radio continuum: ISM.
1 INTRODUCTION
Evolved luminous stars with an initial mass more than 20 M ⊙are
believed to enter an instability phase, historically known as the
luminous blue variable (LBV) phase. This phase is characterized
by intense mass-loss rates ( ∼10−5-10−3M⊙yr−1), associated with
visual/near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopic and photometric variabil-
ities (Humphreys & Davidson 1994 ), before the star evolves as a
Wolf-Rayet (WR) star, once it has reduced its mass (Conti & Frost
1976 ). However, the occurrence of this phase during the evolution
of massive stars and the mass-loss mechanism are still not well
understood, mostly because of the rarity of LBVs in our Galaxy.
At present, there are only 12 objects in the Milky Way that satisfy
the variability criteria coupled with high mass-loss rates. However,
recently the number of candidate LBVs (cLBVs) has increased
to 55 (Humphreys & Davidson 1994 ; van Genderen 2001 ; Clark,
Larionov & Arkharov 2005 ; Gvaramadze, Kniazev & Fabrika 2010 ;
Wachter et al. 2011 ; Naz ´e, Rauw & Hutsem ´ekers 2012 ), based on
the discovery of ring nebulae surrounding these luminous stars. In
fact, as a result of the mass loss, such evolved massive stars can
⋆E-mail: agliozzo@oact.inaf.itbe surrounded by circumstellar nebulae, rich in processed material
(Lamers et al. 2001 ). So far, LBV nebulae (LBVNe) have been ob-
served in about 20 objects among LBVs and cLBVs in our Galaxy,
and they have shown to be dusty, hence emitting in a wide spectral
domain. Such nebulae are indeed the fingerprints of the mass-loss
phenomenon, and therefore multiwavelength observations provide
unique insights into the LBV mass-loss history.
The importance of studying LBVNe is increased by the possi-
bility that they can skip the WR stage and experience an explosive
supernova (SN) event (e.g. Kotak & Vink 2006 ; Vink, de Koter
&K o t a k 2008a ; Van Dyk 2013 ). If this is true, the LBV mass-
loss phenomenon is also of great interest for the study of Type IIn
SNe, whose evolution is influenced by the circumstellar material
originated through the mass loss of the progenitor star (Chugai &
Danziger 2003 ; Smith et al. 2007 ;O f e ke ta l . 2013 ). Therefore,
the mass-loss archaeology appears to be fundamental for different
aspects of the evolution of massive stars.
In this paper, we propose a new study of the ejecta around
G79.29 +0.46, a galactic cLBV located in Cygnus-X ( D∼1.7 kpc;
Schneider et al. 2006 ), one of the richest star-forming regions in
our Galaxy. Because of its location and also because of its beau-
tiful aspect and intriguing nature, this star and its associated neb-
ula have been widely observed in spectral domains ranging from
C/circlecopyrt2014 The Authors
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Royal Astronomical SocietyDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

1392 C. Agliozzo et al.
the optical to the radio. These observations have made it possible
to investigate different components of the ejecta associated with
G79.29 +0.46, which has been shown to have lost mass with differ-
ent events (Jim ´enez-Esteban, Rizzo & Palau 2010 ; Kraemer et al.
2010 ). Diverse works focused on this source can be mentioned
(e.g. Higgs, Wendker & Landecker 1994 ; Waters et al. 1996 ; V oors
et al. 2000a ; Rizzo, Jim ´enez-Esteban & Ortiz 2008 ; Umana et al.
2011 , hereafter Paper I), but a comprehensive study of the star and
its associated nebula has not yet been performed. Moreover, the
physical parameters determined in these works are often based on
different assumptions, making their comparison and interpretation
difficult. For instance, Higgs et al. ( 1994 ) interpreted the ring-like
shell around the star as interstellar material swept up by the stellar
wind and estimated for this shell a mass of about 14-15 M ⊙. Later,
the nebula was recognized as ejecta associated with the star (Waters
et al. 1996 ), but a reappraisal of its properties has still to be carried
out. The nebular mass inferred by Higgs et al. ( 1994 )a n dW a t e r s
et al. ( 1996 ) suggests that the nebula associated with G79.29 +0.46
is amongst the most massive known (see table 9 of Clark et al. 2003 ).
If correct, the mass would rival that of the Homunculus around η
Carina (e.g. Morris et al. 1999 ; Smith et al. 2003 ), but the central star
of G79.29 +0.46 is likely to be over an order of magnitude fainter
(about 105.5L⊙, while ηCar is 106.7L⊙; Higgs et al. 1994 ; V oors
et al. 2000a ; Hillier et al. 2001 ) and consequently far less massive.
Therefore, the nebular mass would represent a higher proportion of
its initial mass.
In this paper, we propose a new analysis of the multiple compo-
nents of the nebula around G79.29 +0.46, using recent observations,
which we performed in the radio domain, new far-infrared (FIR) im-
ages provided by the Herschel Space Observatory and other archival
FIR and mid-IR spectroscopic and photometric data sets collected
in the last 20 yr by different telescopes. The main assumption in
this work is that the photometric and spectroscopic properties of this
star have not changed significantly in the considered time lapse, a
hypothesis reinforced by the fact that G79.29 +0.46 is still a cLBV ,
because no significant visual or NIR variability has been observed
so far (V oors et al. 2000a ; Vink et al. 2008b ).
This work started with our observations of G79.29 +0.46 per-
formed at the Expanded Very Large Array (EVLA). The prelimi-
nary results of these observations were presented in Paper I, and
the highest resolution radio image was compared with the Spitzer
IR images. This revealed that the multiple shells around the star
have signatures of different populations of dust and that the radio
emission is ionization bounded. In this paper, we complement the
preliminary work in Paper I with new radio observations performed
at the Green Bank Telescope (GBT) in order to overcome the typ-
ical problem of interferometers (i.e. zero baseline missing), which
makes it impossible to determine the total flux of extended sources.
Therefore, we propose a new analysis of the radio emission aimedat determining important physical parameters related to the ionized
gas and to the central star. We also perform an analysis of the IR
data sets retrieved from the data archives, in order to determine IR
lines and physical properties related to the dust component.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our
observations and the archival data sets considered in this study.
Then, we present our analysis of the radio data sets (Section 3),
focused on the ionized gas distribution and emission, while in
Section 4 we study the dust emission and properties, probed by
the IR images. Section 5 concerns the spectroscopic mid-IR and
FIR analysis of the nebula. In Section 6, we present a simple model
obtained with the photoionization code CLOUDY . We conclude with
a brief description of the star’s mass-loss history in Section 7.
2 DATA SETS
2.1 Radio observations and data processing
We performed high-resolution and high-sensitivity observations of
G79.29 +0.46 at 20 and 6 cm (1.4 and 5 GHz, respectively) using the
EVLA in configurations D and C. These observations and the data
reduction process have already been described in Paper I, where we
presented only the final map at 6 cm obtained by concatenating the
uvdata sets in both configurations D and C. Here we describe the
imaging process for each data set.
The calibrated visibilities were imaged by adopting a natural
weighting scheme and using the Clark algorithm for the dirty
image deconvolution. Thus, the cleaned images were convolved
with a two-dimensional Gaussian, with the half power beam width
(HPBW) reported in Table 1. Following this scheme, we have ob-
tained four maps. For each frequency, we also concatenated data
obtained in the two array configurations D and C, in order to in-
crease the uvcoverage. Therefore, we imaged the new data sets.
Peak flux density (on-source) and the rms noise are listed in Table 1
for all the maps. We also report the largest angular scale (LAS)
achieved with the proposed array configurations.
To complement the interferometric data sets, single-dish obser-
vations of G79.29 +0.46 were carried out at the GBT at 1.4 and
5 GHz in 2011 June as a part of a project including a sample of
galactic circumstellar shells (Ingallinera et al., in preparation). The
observations were performed by running 30 scans on both RA and
Dec. directions for a final field of view (FOV) of 1 deg 15 arcmin
at 1.4 GHz and 25 arcmin at 5 GHz. The data reduction, consist-
ing of basic calibration and imaging, has been performed using
the IDLroutine topsi provided by the GBT staff. However, the
images were affected by stripes, systematic errors resulting from
instrumental drifts that shift the base level of each scan. There-
fore, the images were destriped using an appropriate filter in the
Table 1. Properties of the interferometric radio maps.
Configuration HPBW PA LAS Peak on-source rms
and frequency (arcsec)2(deg) (arcsec) (mJy beam−1) (mJy beam−1)
EVLA:D, 1.391 GHz 50.40 ×42.83 163.6 129 26.0 2
EVLA:D, 4.959 GHz 16.46 ×14.16 −33.2 88 6.8 0.7
EVLA:C, 1.391 GHz 27.72 ×14.44 44.4 258 9.6 2.5
EVLA:C, 4.959 GHz 9.41 ×4.84 58.7 124 2.11 0.18
EVLA:D +C, 1.391 GHz 26.84 ×24.65 36.1 129 13.17 1.1
EVLA:D +C, 4.959 GHz 4.56 ×3.09 101.16 124 1.76 0.07
VLA:D +C, 8.46 GHz 6.25 ×3.12 57.3 164 1.68 0.15
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

Multiwavelength analysis of the nebula around G79.29 +0.46 1393
Table 2. Properties of the GBT and GBT&EVLA radio maps.
Configuration HPBW PA FOV Peak on-source Std dev.
and frequency (arcsec)2(deg) (arcsec) (mJy beam−1) (mJy beam−1)
GBT, 5.100 GHz 144 ×144 0 1500 14.27 ×10312.43
GBT&EVLA:D +C, 4.959 GHz 4.56 ×3.09 101.16 1500 3.22 0.06
Figure 1. Final radio maps obtained in this work: left, EVLA:D +C 20-cm (1.4-GHz) map; right, 6-cm (5-GHz) map after combining the GBT and EVLA
images. In the bottom-left corner of each map, the synthetic beam is shown (i.e. the resolution in the map). In the right panel, the object marked by ‘a’ i sa n
extragalactic object, first detected by Higgs et al. ( 1994 ).
Fourier domain (Emerson & Graeve 1988 ; Ingallinera et al., in
preparation). Unfortunately, at 1.4 GHz, the beam of the telescope
is about four times larger than the nebula size, and as a result the
sensitivity is limited by confusion. Therefore, we complement the
interferometric map with the single-dish map only at 5 GHz, as in
the following.
The 5-GHz GBT map was rescaled to the EVLA map units (i.e.
converted from the unit of antenna temperature TAto Jy beam−1)b y
using the GBT antenna gain G=2.84ηA, with the antenna efficiency
ηA=0.72,1valid at 5 GHz. The GBT map was then rescaled to the
central frequency of the EVLA data (the GBT central frequency is
5.100 GHz and that of the EVLA is 4.959 GHz). This conversion
was performed by assuming that the emission is almost a result
of optically thin free-free transitions ( α=− 0.1), an assumption
confirmed in Section 3.2 by analysing the spectral index from the
EVLA maps. The resulting flux density peak in the 5-GHz GBT map
is shown in Table 2. In the map, because the background emission
is high, the rms does not give a good estimation of the noise. Hence,
in Table 2we provide the standard deviation (std dev.). The new
single-dish map was then imported into the CASA package (version
4.2) and processed together with the EVLA map at 5 GHz, by using
the recently improved task feather , which combines two images
with different spatial resolutions. In this procedure, the single-dish
flux scale was not modified ( sdfactor =1) and the effective
single-dish diameter was set to 100 m.
The final map at 5 GHz is shown in Fig. 1, together with that at
1.4 GHz. In the 5-GHz map, the peak flux density corresponds to
1See the observing manual for the GBT at http://www.gb.nrao.edu/gbtprops/
man/GBTpg.pdf .the point source projected on the nebula in the north-west direction
(object ‘a’). The map is filled with diffuse emission arising from
the close H IIregion in the south of G79.29 +0.46 (e.g. see fig. 1 of
Higgs et al. 1994 ). As a result, there are no regions free of emission
where we can properly evaluate the rms in the map. Therefore, we
again approximate the noise as the standard deviation (Table 2).
For the analysis of the radio emission (Section 3), the background
contribution is subtracted from the map.
Exploring the VLA data archives, we found further observations
of G79.29 +0.46 at 8.46 GHz. These observations were performed
in 2005 May and August, using configurations C and B (P.I. C. Lang)
in continuum mode. We have retrieved these data sets and calibrated
them by adopting the same procedure used for the EVLA:D +C data.
Properties of the final map are summarized in Table 1.
2.2 Archival infrared data sets
In order to study the different emitting components in the nebula
around G79.29 +0.46, we have retrieved most of the spectroscopic
and photometric data from the mid-IR to FIR present in the archives.
The considered data sets are summarized in Tables 3and4,w h i c h
include data collected with the Herschel Space Observatory ,t h e
Spitzer Space Telescope, the Infrared Space Observatory (ISO), the
Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS ) and the Wide-field Infrared
Survey Explorer (WISE ). In Table 4, we also indicate the wavelength
and the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) for each data set.
The Herschel images come from the Herschel imaging survey
of OB young stellar objects (HOBYS; P.I. F. Motte) and from the
mass-loss of evolved stars (MESS; P.I. M. A. T. Groenewegen) pro-
grammes, which used the photodetecting array camera and spec-
trometer (PACS) and the spectral and photometric imaging receiver
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

1394 C. Agliozzo et al.
Table 3. Summary of archival spectroscopic data and instrument properties.
Telescope Instrument λ FOV Project
(µm) (arcsec)2ID
Spitzer IRS/SL 5.2-14.5 3.6 ×57 17333-248/504a
Spitzer IRS/SH 9.9-19.6 4.7 ×11.3 17333-248/504a
ISO SWS06 12.2-13.2 27 ×14 69200901
ISO SWS06 17-27; 30-34 33 ×20 76802901
Spitzer IRS/LH 18.7-37.2 11.1 ×22.3 17333-248/504a
ISO SWS06 34-35 33 ×20 51705105
ISO LWS02 41.14-178.75 84 ×84 358010-03/05/07/
358010-08/11/14
aON and OFF nebula observations, respectively.
Table 4. Summary of archival photometric data and instrument properties.
Telescope Instrument λ FWHM Project
(µm) (arcsec) ID
ISO CAM01 8.69 3 35700630
ISO CAM01 12.41 4.3 35700630
WISE W3 12 6 WISE Survey
ISO CAM01 13.53 4.7 35700630
WISE W4 22 12 WISE Survey
Spitzer MIPS 24 6 22508544
IRAS HiRES 60 60 IRAS Survey
Herschel PACS 70 5.5 1342244-168/169
Spitzer MIPS 70 18 22508544
Herschel PACS 100 6.7 1342196-767/768
Herschel PACS 160 11 1342196-769/770
Herschel SPIRE 250 18 1342187718
Herschel SPIRE 350 25 1342187718
Herschel SPIRE 500 37 1342187718
(SPIRE). The PACS photometric data (from MESS) include the 100-
µm data, while the SPIRE/PACS parallel observations (HOBYS)
provide the 70-, 160-, 250-, 350- and 500- µm data. The Herschel
images are presented here for the first time, as well as the WISE
(Wright et al. 2010 ) data (which come from the Image Atlas), while
the multiband imaging photometer (MIPS) maps have already been
published (Jim ´enez-Esteban et al. 2010 ; Kraemer et al. 2010 ; Paper
I). The ISO images were briefly discussed in the poster paper of
Trams, V oors & Waters ( 1998 ) and those of the IRAS (obtained
with HIRES ) by Higgs et al. ( 1994 ) and Waters et al. ( 1996 ).
From the ISO data archive, we also retrieved the spectroscopic
data sets (see Table 3). The long wavelength spectrometer (LWS)
spectra were presented by Wendker et al. ( 1998 ), but they provided
only a qualitative discussion of the data. The short wavelength spec-
trometer (SWS) spectra appeared for the first time in Morris et al.
(2008 ). The infrared spectrograph (IRS) spectra were acquired with
the short-low (SL), short-high (SH) and long-high (LH) modules.
These data have already been analysed by Jim ´enez-Esteban et al.
(2010 ), but, despite the interesting study proposed, they did not
consider the off-nebula data set. Hence, they did not subtract the
background, which strongly affects the target continuum and line
emissions. Moreover, they did not apply corrections for extinction
in their diagnostic study. Thus, we propose a new analysis. The
positions of the IRS, SWS and LWS slits projected on to the neb-
ula around G79.29 +0.46 are shown in the Appendix (see Figs A1
andA2).3 ANALYSIS OF THE RADIO CONTINUUM
EMISSION
3.1 Morphology and analysis of the ionized gas
The map at 1.4 GHz shows that the emission arises mostly from
the nebula (see the left panel of Fig. 1). The central object is not
detected for two possible reasons: (1) because the spectral index of
stellar winds ( α∼0.6) implies low flux density at low frequencies;
(2) because of the confusion limit of the interferometer at this
frequency. The spur-emission in the north-east of the nebula - first
noticed by Higgs et al. ( 1994 ) - is visible. At 5 GHz, it is possible
to distinguish the emission from a compact central object, as well
as that from the nebula and from the spur (Fig. 1, right panel). As
already discussed in Paper I, the highest resolution maps (at 5 GHz)
reveal a highly structured texture of the nebula and the extragalactic
source overlaid on the nebula in the north-west part. The map seems
to be filled with a diffuse emission, which has no counterpart with
the outer IR shell. Therefore, we conclude that it arises from the
close H IIregion DR 15. In contrast, at 8 GHz, the array has resolved
out most of the extended emission from the nebula, but the central
object is still bright.
We have estimated the total flux density over the radio shell from
our final images, with the one at 1.4 GHz having the best dynamical
range and LAS, and that at 5 GHz being corrected for the flux loss.
We have measured the flux densities using CASA. At 5 GHz, we also
measured the background emission in different regions around the
nebula and then we subtracted the average value from the total flux
density. The flux density errors were determined as in
σ=/radicalbig
(RMS tot)2+(σcalSν)2. (1)
Here, RMS totis the rms noise in the map integrated over the area
covered by the source and σcalis the systematic relative error due
to the flux calibrator (typically 3-5 per cent). For the 5-GHz mea-
surements, RMS totwas replaced with the standard deviation in the
considered regions multiplied by the area of the source. The values
found are S(1.4 GHz) =320±82 and S(5 GHz) =323±126 mJy.
We highlight the fact that the 5-GHz error is large because of the
background emission, which is non-uniform and makes our estimate
uncertain. We also note that the 1.4-GHz value might be underes-
timated because it is not complemented with single-dish data. The
values found are lower than those obtained by Higgs et al. ( 1994 ),
who used interferometric and single-dish observations, but probably
did not subtract the background. This leads to the discrepancy with
our measurements. We have also compared our flux densities at both
frequencies with those measured on the EVLA:D maps (with the
best LAS) over the radio shell in order to verify their consistency.
We have found a good agreement.
3.2 Spectral index
To better understand the nature of the radio nebula, we have created
a spectral index map between the EVLA:D +C 1.4- and 5-GHz
maps. We have chosen these maps because they have comparable
LAS (see Table 1). Before calculating the spectral index, we have
re-gridded the map at 5 GHz to the grid of 1.4 GHz. We have
converted the maps (originally in unit of Jy beam−1)t oJ yp i x e l−1,
dividing by the number of pixels contained in the area of a beam
(at the HPBW). Then, we deconvolved the maps from their initial
beams and reconvolved with a final beam of 27 ×25 arcsec2.T h i s
operation is equal to the convolution with a Gaussian beam with
σ2=(1/8ln2)(HPBW2
i−HPBW2
f). Finally, the spectral index
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

Multiwavelength analysis of the nebula around G79.29 +0.46 1395
Figure 2. Left: spectral index map of G79 between 1.4 and 5 GHz. Right: error spectral index map.
map was calculated by discarding pixels below 5 σ, where the noise
was evaluated in the reconvolved images. Considering the error
for the flux as in equation (1) (in units of Jy pixel−1), with the
uncertainty of the calibrator flux σcalequal to 3 per cent at 5 GHz
and 5 per cent at 1.4 GHz, we have also estimated the error spectral
index map. The spectral index and error maps are plotted in Fig. 2.
Over the nebula, the average spectral index /angbracketleftαneb/angbracketrightis
−0.29±0.15, which is consistent with the theoretical value ( −0.1)
for optically thin H IIregions emitting free-free radiation. The lower
limit of /angbracketleftαneb/angbracketrightis−0.44, indicating that the flux density at 5 GHz is
underestimated because of flux loss resulting from the interferome-
ter. The value of αnebvaries slightly in some interesting regions. For
example, in the south-west part of the nebula, close to the IR dark
cloud (IRDC; Kraemer et al. 2010 ),αneb=−0.18±0.14, which is
still consistent with optically thin free-free but slightly higher than
/angbracketleftαneb/angbracketright. We can speculate that this is a modified region because of
shock (Paper I). On the spur-region, the maximum value of αnebis
0.55, with an error of 0.17. This value is usually consistent with
stellar winds, but in this case it is more likely because of emission
from density clumps with a turn-over frequency between the con-
sidered frequencies. This spur-region is not correlated with the IR
emission of G79.29 +0.46 and, at the moment, we are not able to
establish whether it belongs to the nebula or whether it is really a
foreground/background emission region.
To derive the nature of the central source, we have determined its
spectral index between 5 and 8 GHz from the corresponding flux
densities. Therefore, we have measured its flux density by fitting a
Gaussian around the source in both maps. As a result, we have found
S(4.96 GHz) =1.81±0.08 and S(8.46 GHz) =2.35±0.19 mJy,
where the error is determined as in equation (1). Therefore, we es-
timated the spectral index αcentre by using these measurements. The
spectral index error was obtained by adopting the error propagation
for independent measures. We find αcentre=0.83±0.18, which
is consistent with a stellar wind ( α=0.6). The measurements we
are comparing come from observations at different epochs (2005
and 2010 for the 8- and 5-GHz data sets, respectively). However,
although LBVs can suffer from changes in the mass-loss rate (e.g.A GC a r ;S t a h le ta l . 2001 ; Vink & de Koter 2002 ;G r o he ta l .
2009 ), G79.29 +0.46 has not yet shown any important variability.
Therefore, we are confident that the two data sets are compati-
ble. Previously, through their observations of the central object at
4.86 and 8.46 GHz, Higgs et al. ( 1994 ) derived a spectral index of
1.39±0.14, which is steeper than the canonical value. This is very
likely because they obtained a larger beam at 8.46 GHz ( ∼11 arcsec)
and therefore the flux measurement was contaminated by circum-
stellar or background emission. They pointed out that their spectral
index is still consistent with mass loss from a stellar object. With
our estimate, we can now confirm that the central object detected is
a stellar wind from the cLBV G79.29 +0.46.
3.3 Ionized mass
Once the nature of the radio nebula is known, we can estimate its
average electron density and its ionized mass, because for a nebula
of H, emitting free-free radiation and with a temperature about
104K, the optical depth τνcan be expressed as
τν=/integraldisplay
κνdl=8.24×10−2/parenleftbiggTe
K/parenrightbigg−1.35/parenleftbiggν
5 GHz/parenrightbigg−2.1EM
pc cm−6.(2)
Here, the emission measure (EM) is
EM=/integraldisplays
0n2
eds(pc cm−6). (3)
Therefore, we can use the optical depth map (as determined from
the radiative transfer equation in the case of optically thin emission
not absorbed along the line of sight and considering the Rayleigh-
Jeans approximation for the Planckian, valid in the radio domain) to
obtain the emission measure and hence the average electron density
from the radio measurements. For this analysis, we refer to the final
image at 5 GHz (Fig. 1), because it covers all the angular scales of
the considered region.
Before calculating the optical depth, we have subtracted the back-
ground emission (estimated by averaging the values found in dif-
ferent regions on the map) and we have converted the map from
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

1396 C. Agliozzo et al.
units of Jy beam−1to Jy pixel−1, as before. We find an average
τνof∼0.2. Therefore, the average value for /angbracketleftEM/angbracketrightover the shell
is 680 ±270 pc cm−6. The error in /angbracketleftEM/angbracketrighttakes into account the
uncertainty of the flux density measurement. In order to calculate
the electron density as well, we need to establish the geometrical
depth of the nebula. We assume the geometry of a hollow sphere
with average inner and outer radii of /angbracketleftRin/angbracketright=80 arcsec (which cor-
responds to 0.66 pc at a distance of 1.7 kpc) and /angbracketleftRout/angbracketright=110 arcsec
(0.9 pc), respectively. Therefore, we assume an average geometri-
cal depth /angbracketlefts/angbracketrightof 0.67 pc, and we find an average electron density of
∼32±20 cm−3. Finally, the ionized mass is 1.51 ±0.96 M ⊙in the
considered volume. Modelling the radio flux densities, Higgs et al.
(1994 ) obtained a mass of 6.3 M ⊙at a distance of 1.7 kpc. They
assumed a larger volume for the shell (with inner and outer radii
of 95 and 130 arcsec, respectively) and very likely did not subtract
the background/foreground contribution from the nebula emission.
Adopting the same values and the electron density ( ∼45±36 cm−3)
derived from the map not background-subtracted, we find a mass
of 3.5 ±2.8 M⊙, which is lower than the value provided by Higgs
et al. ( 1994 ), but still consistent within the error.
3.4 Current mass loss and spectral type of the star
Because the emission from the central object is a result of stellar
wind (as shown in Section 3.2), from the measured flux density we
estimate the mass-loss rate of the star, following Panagia & Felli
(1975 ):
˙M=6.7×10−4v∞S3/4
νD3/2(ν×gff)−1/2(M⊙yr−1). (4)
Here, Sν=1.51 mJy is the observed radio flux density at 4.96 GHz,
v∞=110 km s−1(V oors et al. 2000a ) is the terminal velocity of the
wind and D=1.7 kpc (Jim ´enez-Esteban et al. 2010 ). The free-free
Gaunt factor gffis approximated as in Leitherer & Robert ( 1991 ):
for a gas with an electron temperature of Te=10 000 K at 4.96 GHz,
gff=5.08. Therefore, we find that the star is losing mass at a rate
of
(1.4±0.2)×10−6/parenleftbiggv∞
110 km s−1/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggD
1.7 kpc/parenrightbigg3/2
f1/2M⊙yr−1,
where fis the filling factor.
Once we have evaluated the ionized mass in the nebula (as in
Section 3.3), we can provide an estimate of the ionizing photon flux
from the star FUV,a s
FUV=Mion/angbracketleftne/angbracketrightβ2
mp(M⊙), (5)
an approximation valid for an ionization bounded nebula (as found
in Paper I). Considering the standard values for the recombination
coefficient β2and the proton mass mp(M⊙), we find log FUV=46.24,
which corresponds to a spectral type from B2 to B1 for a supergiant
I (Panagia 1973 ). V oors et al. ( 2000a ) proposed a mid-B supergiant
after an analysis of the optical and NIR spectra of the central object.
However, the value we have found must not be considered as the
current spectral type of the star, because the recombination time
of the gas is much longer (tens of thousands years) than the typ-
ical LBV variability cycles (decades). This implies that the radio
emission from the shell is not sensitive to changes in the stellar
parameters. The spectral type derived with this method must be
considered an average value over ∼104yr.4 ANALYSIS OF THE INFRARED
CONTINUUM EMISSION
4.1 Morphology of the infrared nebula from
theHerschel images
The high-resolution Spitzer images have been already described in
different works, where it has been pointed out that the morphology
of the IR nebula consists of multiple shells, indicative of mass-loss
episodes at different epochs. These previous works have shown that
there are at least two populations of dust: the hot one emitting in
the infrared array camera (IRAC) bands, and the warm one emitting
in the MIPS bands. The hot dust ( ∼1500 K) is distributed in the
inner ring (with a peak at about ±100 arcsec), mostly cospatial
with the ionized gas (Kraemer et al. 2010 ; Paper I). The warm dust
(∼90-350 K) emitting at longer wavelengths ( >24µm) is more
extended in the inner ring than the hot dust (Kraemer et al. 2010 )
and presents a further component in the outer shell (peaked at about
±200 arcsec; Jim ´enez-Esteban et al. 2010 ; Kraemer et al. 2010 ;
Paper I). A central object, on the position of the star, is detected up
to 24µm.
Fig. 3is a three-colour image obtained by superimposing the
Herschel /PACS images at 70 µm (in blue), 100 µm (green) and
160µm (red). We set up the absolute flux scale of the Herschel im-
ages by using the standard calibration method developed by Bernard
et al. ( 2010 ). The 70- and 100- µm images have a resolution compa-
rable to that of the Spitzer /MIPS image at 24 µm, while at 160 µmi t
is comparable to that of the MIPS image at 70 µm( s e eT a b l e 4and
Fig. 4). The 70- and 100- µm maps show the overall morphology
of the 24- µm emission, probing the warm dust distributed in the
inner and outer shells. However, we note that the broad inner shell
reveals another component, peaked at about ±150 arcsec, leading
to a total of three dusty shells (as indicated with arcs in Fig. 3). The
first two shells (the wide bright one peaked at ±100 arcsec and the
close faint one peaked at ±150 arcsec) also have a counterpart at
160µm. At this wavelength, there are also hints of the outer shell,
but the background is high and confusion becomes dominant. For
the photometric measurements, in this case we concentrate only
on the two inner shells (lower limit). We also note that the central
object is quite bright at 70 and 100 µm and weaker, but still visible,
at 160 µm.
In the SPIRE bands (250, 350 and 500 µm) the central object is
not detected, the nebula is less bright, and the IRDC in the south
appears in emission (as evident in the bottom panels of Fig. 4). At
these wavelengths, there are hints of arcs in the position of the inner
shell, but the IRDC becomes brighter and contaminates the shell
emission. For this reason, in our analysis we refer only to the 70-,
100- and 160- µm images. The absence of further nebular features
in the position of the nebula might exclude the presence of a cold
dust component, even if it could be not detected because it is too
faint relative to the surrounding interstellar medium.
4.2 Analysis of the infrared emission
We have measured the flux densities of the nebula around
G79.29 +0.46 by using the package SKYVIEW ,2release 3.6. We
remind the reader that all the images we have used are summa-
rized in Table 4. Considering the circular shape of the nebula, flux
densities were evaluated in circles enclosing the emitting regions to
the specific wavelength (as indicated in Table 5).
2http://www.ipac.caltech.edu/skyview/
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

Multiwavelength analysis of the nebula around G79.29 +0.46 1397
Figure 3. Three-colour image of the nebula around G79.29 +0.46 from the Herschel data at 70 µm (blue), 100 µm (green) and 160 µm (red). The edges of
the three shells are highlighted with arcs.
To take into account the strong diffuse emission around the neb-
ula, we evaluated the background in annuli close to the nebula
and we subtracted it from the integrated flux densities. As already
mentioned, the background is important and extremely variable,
especially at the longer wavelengths ( ≥24µm), and this causes a
high uncertainty in its determination ( ∼15-25 per cent). This un-
certainty, integrated over the emission region, causes errors up to
∼50-70 per cent on the flux densities. In Table 5, we report flux
densities and their errors at all wavelengths. Note that in the table,
the flux density error includes only calibration uncertainties.
4.3 Nature of the infrared central object
Hot stars such as G79.29 +0.46 are not expected to be detected
at longer wavelengths. However, at the position of the star, the
Herschel images show compact emission at 70, 100 and 160
µm. To understand the nature of this emission, we consulted the
NASA/IPAC Infrared Science Archive (IRSA) point source cata-
logues and derived the NIR and mid-IR flux densities of the star
from the Two-Micron All-Sky Survey (2MASS) J,H,KandWISE
magnitudes.3We also included the IRAC and MIPS photometric
3The 2MASS and WISE magnitudes were transformed into flux densities
using their well-known zero values (see their release notes).measurements from the Spitzer Legacy Survey of the Cygnux-X
complex (Hora et al. 2007 ). For flux densities at longer wave-
lengths (PACS bands), we used our own measurements, obtained
by using an aperture of 6 arcsec and the following aperture correc-
tion: 1/(0.701,0.672,0.438) at 70, 100 and 160 µm, respectively.
The mentioned flux densities for the central source are listed in
Table 6.
Thus, we have fitted the IR photometric data with blackbody and
greybody functions, following the method used by Flagey et al.
(2011b ) to constrain the nature of other hot stars surrounded by
mid-IR shells by means of IRS spectra and NIR to mid-IR pho-
tometric measurements. In the fitting, we have also included the
IRS/SL spectrum (Section 5) taken on the position of the star. We
note that the photometric data match very well the IRS data without
any scaling factor, despite the fact that the background is evaluated
in different regions. We find that a minimum of five components
are required to obtain a decent fit of the complete spectral energy
distribution (SED). We impose in particular a blackbody for the cen-
tral star and ν2Bνgreybodies for the other components. We set the
effective temperature of the star Teff=20 000 K. The free parame-
ters are the four dust temperatures from T1toT4, the amplitudes of
the black/greybodies, and the extinction expressed as a depth τ9.7.
Each of these parameters can vary within a defined range: Tefffrom
20 000 to 24 000 K; T1from 500 to 2500 K; T2from 150 to 500 K;
T3from 50 to 150 K; T4from 30 to 100 K; τ9.7from 0 to 10. A best
fit is shown in Fig. 5.
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

1398 C. Agliozzo et al.
Figure 4. The Herschel images of G79.29 +0.46. The upper plots show PACS 70 µm (left), 100 µm (centre) and 160 µm (right). The lower plots show SPIRE
250µm (left), 350 µm (centre) and 500 µm (right). For each map, the field of view is about 4 ×4 arcmin2centred on the central source position.
Table 5. Total flux densities of the IR nebula.
λ Total flux Instrument
(µm) density (Jy)a
8.69 7.74 ±1.55bISOCAM01
11.48 11.94 ±2.39bISOCAM01
12 14.8 ±2.0bWISE -W3
12.41 8.9 ±1.8bISOCAM01
13.53 9.11 ±1.82bISOCAM01
15.96 20.6 ±4.1cISOCAM01
22 166.1 ±17.0dWISE -W4
24 165.8 ±17.0dMIPS
25 194.9 ±20.0dIRAS -HiRES
60 725.6 ±218.0dIRAS -HiRES
70 552.2 ±110.0dMIPS
70 583.7 ±117.0dPACS
100 500 ±350dPACS
160 31.8 ±10.0ePACS
aErrors include only calibration uncertainties.
bInside a circle with a radius of 1.96 arcmin.
cInside a circle with a radius of 2.2 arcmin.
dInside a circle with a radius of 3.6 arcmin.
eInside a circle with a radius of 3 arcmin.
The derived parameters are the temperatures ( /similarequal1170, 340, 145
and 40 K) of the four dust components, the depth at 9.7 µm( 1 )
and the reduced χ2(46.87). However, we draw attention to the
fact that, because of the many degrees of freedom and the possi-Table 6. Total flux densities of the IR central object.
λ Total flux Instrument Comment
(µm) density (Jy)a
1.235 2.73 ±0.02 2MASS 2MASS Catalogue
1.662 7.81 ±0.04 2MASS 2MASS Catalogue
2.159 12.37 ±0.04 2MASS 2MASS Catalogue
3.4 10.17 ±4.51 W1 WISE Catalogue
3.6 10.57 ±1.05 IRAC Cyg-X Legacy Catalogue
4.5 9.40 ±1.00 IRAC Cyg-X Legacy Catalogue
5.8 6.82 ±0.50 IRAC Cyg-X Legacy Catalogue
8.0 4.60 ±0.40 IRAC Cyg-X Legacy Catalogue
12.0 2.32 ±0.05 W3 WISE Catalogue
22.00 0.93 ±0.04 W4 WISE Catalogue
23.99 1.08 ±0.02 MIPS Cyg-X Legacy Catalogue
24.0 1.01 ±0.05 MIPS This work
70.0 0.44 ±0.04aPACS This work
100.0 0.30 ±0.03aPACS This work
160.0 0.11 ±0.03aPACS This work
aErrors include only calibration uncertainties.
ble degeneracy between them, we find many similar best fits with
slightly different final parameters, depending on the initial guess of
the fit. The four dust component temperatures should thus be seen
as rough estimates. We suggest that there is a range of temperatures,
well described by the range explored by T1toT4, in a circumstellar
envelope close to the central star. The temperature of the star is
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

Multiwavelength analysis of the nebula around G79.29 +0.46 1399
Figure 5. Five-component fitting of the central source SED. Red diamonds are the best-fitting values and show both the star (blackbody) and four dust
components ( ν2Bν(T) greybodies). Black crosses are the observed values. The IRS/SL spectrum is shown in blue. The derived parameters are given:
temperature Tifor each component, the reduced χ2and the optical depth at 9.7 µm.
not well constrained, as shown in the figure, because the blackbody
contributes very little to the Jband only.
The IRS spectrum4(described in Section 5) gives strong evi-
dence that an absorption feature is present at 10 µm because of
astronomical silicates. Therefore, we use the depth τ9.7, as obtained
in the fit, to determine the visual extinction AVtowards the star, by
means of the extinction curve determined by Mathis ( 1990 ). We
findτ9.7=1 (with an uncertainty of about 10 per cent). Therefore,
we obtain AV=18.6 in the case of a constant total-to-selective
parameter RV=3.1 (a typical value for small grains in the Milky
Way).
Visual extinction of G79.29 +0.46 has been determined by var-
ious authors and optical/NIR observations of the source have pro-
vided diverse values for AV. For example, Higgs et al. ( 1994 ) found
a value of 16 ±1 mag, by comparing the shape of the observed red
continuum with the reddened model continua of early-type stars.
Trams et al. ( 1999 ) derived AV=11.9 mag by studying the IR
properties of G79.29 +0.46. V oors et al. ( 2000a ) derived a visual
extinction of 14.9 mag by means of JHK spectra, assuming an
effective temperature of 18 000 K and the extinction law by Torres-
Dodgen, Carroll & Tapia ( 1991 ). V oors et al. ( 2000a ) also measured
the extinction from the diffuse interstellar bands (DIBs), by using
a relation between the strengths of these bands and E(B−V),
valid in several OB associations in Cygnus. In this case, they found
AV∼6.4 mag, which is much less than the value derived previ-
ously. As a reason for the discrepancy between the two methods,
they explained that the DIBs do not measure the extinction due to
molecular clouds, while G79.29 +0.46 is very close to the obscured
star-forming region DR 15. Because of the many degrees of free-
dom of our model, we can not assess which method among these
is the best for determining the extinction towards the star. For the
4For this analysis, we do not apply extinction correction.moment, we assume that AVmust range between ∼6a n d ∼18.6
mag (see Section 5.1 for more details about extinction).
4.4 Infrared physical properties of the extended nebula
Following a simple method described by Dayal et al. ( 1998 )a n d
Umana et al. ( 2010 ), we have also estimated the dust temperature
and mass for the dust components in the extended nebula. The
average dust temperature can be derived by interpolating a Planckian
distribution between two observed brightnesses. Assuming that the
IR continuum emission observed is due to thermal dust5and is not
absorbed by colder dust along the line of sight. From the radiative
transfer equation and the optical depth, we can derive the column
density, ρland, therefore, the mass of the nebula as
M=ρl/Omega1D2. (6)
Here, /Omega1D2is the physical area covered by the emitting region.
For the analysis of the hot dust, we consider the ISOCAM maps
at 8.69 and 13.53 µm, which have the same resolution. In this
analysis, we do not consider the IRAC maps because they are too
contaminated by the saturated star emission. From the measured
ISOCAM flux densities in Table 5, we have subtracted the stellar
component, through aperture photometry. After this subtraction, we
estimated for the nebula the following flux densities: S(8.69µm)=
6.5±1.3a n d S(13.53µm)=8.3±1.7 Jy. For the analysis of the
warm dust component, we refer to the Spitzer /MIPS 24- µm and the
Herschel /PACS 70- µm maps, given their similarity in resolution.
The nebula flux densities in this case are S(24µm)=165±17 and
5Our spectroscopic analysis in Section 5 shows that there is no evidence
for the presence of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). However,
emission lines can contaminate the continuum emission at wavelengths
<15µm.
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

1400 C. Agliozzo et al.
Table 7. Assumed chemical composition, grain size and absorption coefficient. We also show the derived optical depth, temperature and mass of the dust,
where λ1andλ2are 8.69 and 13.5 µm, respectively (for hot dust) and 24 and 70 µm (for warm dust).
Composition κλ1 κλ2 τλ1 τλ2 T Mλ1 Mλ2
and size ( µm) (cm2g−1)( c m2g−1)( K ) ( M ⊙)( M ⊙)
Hot dust
Silic. (0.01, 0.1) 762 743 (2.5 ±0.5)×10−9(3.5±0.7)×10−9518±210 (4.6 ±0.9)×10−8(6.5±1.3)×10−8
Silic. (1) 807 920 (1.7 ±0.3)×10−9(2.6±0.5)×10−9587±238 (2.9 ±0.6)×10−8(4.0±0.8)×10−8
Graph. (0.01) 390 230 (1.1 ±0.2)×10−8(9.5±2.0)×10−9357±145 (3.9 ±0.8)×10−7(5.8±1.2)×10−7
Graph. (0.1) 476 257 (1.4 ±0.3)×10−8(1.1±0.2)×10−8336±136 (4.2 ±0.8)×10−7(6.3±1.3)×10−7
Graph. (1) 1980 985 (1.9 ±0.4)×10−8(1.4±0.3)×10−8319±129 (1.30 ±0.3)×10−7(2.0±0.4)×10−7
Warm dust
Silic. (0.01, 0.1, 1) 647.7 69 (4.0 ±0.4)×10−4(4.2±0.8)×10−559±18 0.032 ±0.006 0.032 ±0.006
Graph. (0.01) 300 107 (6.1 ±0.6)×10−5(2.2±0.4)×10−572±22 0.011 ±0.002 0.011 ±0.002
Graph. (0.1) 309 109 (6.2 ±0.6)×10−5(2.2±0.4)×10−672±22 0.010 ±0.002 0.010 ±0.002
Graph. (1) 600 300 (3.6 ±0.4)×10−5(1.8±0.4)×10−577±23 0.0031 ±0.006 0.0031 ±0.006
S(70µm)=583±117 Jy after subtraction of the central source
contribution.
For hot grains, with an average temperature of ∼552 K (sili-
cate) or ∼337 K (graphite), the resulting average mass is very small
(∼10−7M⊙) and hence negligible. The warm dust has an aver-
age temperature of 59 K (graphite) or 74 K (silicate) and is more
massive (3.2 ×10−2or 8.0 ×10−3M⊙, for graphite or silicate,
respectively). In all cases, the dust is optically thin. The temperature
and mass are summarized in Table 7, as derived for both the hot
and warm dust components. Note that they depend on the chemi-
cal composition and are obtained by assuming single grain sizes,
as indicated. Uncertainties take into account only the flux density
errors. By using a dust model to fit the IRAS images, Waters et al.
(1996 ) provided a lower limit for the inner shell temperature of
about 65 K. They also derived a dust mass of 0.14 M ⊙. To under-
stand the discrepancy with our dust mass (a few 10−2M⊙), we
have used the model described by Waters et al. ( 1996 ) and Izumiura
et al. ( 1997 ), based basically on the integration of the mass-loss
rate. By using our parameters, we find good agreement between the
two methods. Therefore, the discrepancy is mostly a result of the
assumed parameters, in particular the mass-loss rate and the outer
radius of the shell, very likely overestimated in Waters et al. ( 1996 )
because of the bad resolution of the IRAS images. Modelling the 8-
and 24- µm emission from the Spitzer /MIPS image with a radiative
transfer code, Kraemer et al. ( 2010 ) found slightly higher temper-
atures (87-108 K), in the hypothesis of a carbon-rich nebula with
amorphous carbon grains, but they considered a larger distance for
G79.29 +0.46 in their calculations ( D=3 kpc).
A mixed composition of silicate and graphite in dust has been
observed in LBVNe (e.g. Wray 17-96; Egan et al. 2002 ). Similarly,
we assume that the nebula around G79.29 +0.46 has a mixed chem-
istry and, considering the average masses for silicate and graphite,
we derive an average total dust mass of 0.02 M ⊙.T h i sl e a d st o
a gas-to-dust ratio of ∼80, with the ionized mass of 1.51 M ⊙(as
estimated in Section 3.3). The value found is lower than the galactic
interstellar case (100), but is still consistent. However, this must be
considered a lower limit, because we are not taking into account the
neutral mass very likely distributed in the outer shell.
5 ANALYSIS OF THE MID-INFRARED
SPECTRA
In this section, we present our analysis of the archival mid-IR and
FIR spectra collected by the LWS and SWS on board ISOa n db yt h einstrument IRS on board Spitzer . The positions of the spectrometers
during the ISOandSpitzer observations are shown in the Appendix
(see Figs A1andA2). For the IRS spectra, we refer to the data
obtained after the background subtraction. Data taken at the same
channel were also merged in order to work with a spectrum per
module. The mentioned spectra are shown in the Appendix (see
Figs A3-A5). Because G79.29 +0.46 is a heavily reddened object,
before analysing the observed lines, the fluxes must be corrected
for extinction along the line of sight. For the analysis, we refer only
to the corrected fluxes.
5.1 Correction for extinction
Recent studies on the Cygnus-X region report median values for
AVof 5.6 (Hanson 2003 ) and 5.7 (Albacete Colombo et al. 2007 ),
respectively, based on NIR and X-ray observations. To correct the
IR spectra for interstellar extinction, we have assumed that the
visual extinction for the nebula must be similar to that determined
from other stars in the same region. These values are much lower
than that obtained by fitting the IR emission of the central source
(Section 4.2). However, because we cannot estimate the intrinsic
extinction of the source due to the shell and the dusty central object,
we consider for the correction the lowest value of 5.6, keeping in
mind that the derived line fluxes might be lower limits. However, in
the analysis, we discuss the effects of taking AV=18.6 (Section 5.3).
Therefore, we used AV=5.6 and the extinction law determined by
Mathis ( 1990 ) for a constant total-to-selective parameter RV=3.1.
We measured line fluxes before and after the extinction correc-
tion. To derive the fluxes, we used the ISAPpackage version 2.1 and
fitted the lines by means of single Gaussians, after having estimated
the baseline, usually of the first order but in some cases of the sec-
ond or third order. We report intensities with a signal-to-noise ratio
(S/N) usually larger than 5. The errors are the result of uncertainties
in the background fitting procedure and do not take into account the
absolute calibration errors (better than 5 per cent for IRS and SWS,
and than 7 per cent for LWS). An additional uncertainty component,
not included because it is unknown, arises from the extinction curve.
Line fluxes are listed in the Appendix (Tables A1-A5).
5.2 Detected lines and shock-versus-photodissociation
region diagnostics
The mid-IR and FIR spectra of G79.29 +0.46 are rich in ionic and
atomic fine-structure lines (e.g. [C II], [O I], [Si II], [Fe II]), similarly
to other LBVs (e.g. HR Car; Umana et al. 2009 ). In G79.29 +0.46,
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

Multiwavelength analysis of the nebula around G79.29 +0.46 1401
this was first pointed out by Wendker et al. ( 1998 )a n dJ i m ´enez-
Esteban et al. ( 2010 ). However, after the background subtraction
from the IRS spectra, we find some differences with Jim ´enez-
Esteban et al. ( 2010 ). For instance, some emission lines disappear.
In particular, the [F I] 24.75- µma n d[ S i II] 34.80- µm lines. [Ar II]( o r
[Ne II]) 6.97- µm, [Ar III] 8.99- µm, [Ar III] 21.82- µm, [Ne III] 10.88-
µma n d[ N i II] 10.68- µm are also not present.6[Ni II] 10.68- µmi s
visible, but it does not reach 3 σ. We also do not detect the H 2tran-
sitions at 17.03 and 28.21 µm. All these lines surely arise from the
interstellar medium.
Jim´enez-Esteban et al. ( 2010 ) attributed emission lines in the
band of the unidentified infrared (UIR) features (centred at 3.3, 6.2,
7.7, 8.6 and 11.3 µm) to PAHs. After subtracting the background
emission, we find that these features in the IRS/SL disappear. There-
fore, the emission in the UIR bands observed by Jim ´enez-Esteban
et al. ( 2010 ) is interstellar. In the Appendix, Fig. A1gives an indi-
cation that the mentioned lines belong to the interstellar medium.
Conversely, the lines shown in Fig. A5arise from the nebula (as
shown in Fig. A1). According to Jim ´enez-Esteban et al. ( 2010 ), we
confirm the absence of [S I] 25.2- µm.
The ISO/LWS spectra have strong [O I] 63-µm, [O III] 52- and
88-µm, [N II] 122- µma n d[ C II] 157- µm line emissions (we remind
the reader that unfortunately ISO off-nebula observations are not
available in the archives). The [N II] 122- µm line is indicative of
high-ionization regions. Together with the [O III] 88-µm line, it
is brighter inside the inner shell, along the east-west direction.
The presence of both transitions in the outer shell also indicates
an extended nature of the ionized gas. We cannot exclude that it
is interstellar diffuse gas, because off-nebula observations are not
available. However, the line fluxes vary across the nebula, and hence
at least some of it might belong to the source.
Looking at the [O I] 63.2- µm line fluxes detected with ISO/LWS,
we can see that they are very similar in flux over the nebula. The
[OI] emission is typical of shocked regions or of photodissocia-
tion regions (PDRs). This line is the main cooling transition in the
dense post-shocked region of dissociative shocks (Giannini, Nisini
& Lorenzetti 2001 ; van Loon et al. 2010 ). When the [O I] line is
fainter than the [O III] line, it indicates the absence of strong in-
teractions (van Loon et al. 2010 ). In this case, the [O I] line forms
in PDRs, while [O III] is typically strong in high-ionized diffuse
gas (Mizutani, Onaka & Shibai 2002 ). The comparison in the LWS
spectra between these two transitions seems to exclude the pres-
ence of shocked regions, but background observations are needed
in order to be sure that all the line emission arises from the nebula.
Another indicator of shocked regions or PDRs is the line pair [O I]
63-µm/[C II] 157.7- µm (Tielens & Hollenbach 1985 ). Strong [C II]
emission is typical of PDRs. In particular, when the ratio is less than
10, then the presence of a PDR is favoured. From the analysis of this
ratio in our LWS, it seems to exclude the presence of shocked re-
gions in the area covered by the observations (Fig. A2). It is clearly
evident that a PDR is present between the H IIregion, probed by
free-free emission, and the molecular cloud, probed by rotational
CO line emission (Rizzo et al. 2008 ). However, because we do not
have background data sets for these spectra, we cannot exclude
the fact that this gas belongs to the diffuse interstellar medium.
For this reason, we neglect the PDR mass in the total nebula mass
estimation.
6However, these lines detected by Jim ´enez-Esteban et al. ( 2010 ) might
be present in other IRS data sets, which we have not re-analysed because
off-nebula observations were not available.[OIII] 51.8- µm is particularly bright in the north-east part of the
second shell, next to the radio spur-emission (see Fig. 1). Analysis
of the radio spectral index in this region has shown us a value
(0.55) different from optically thin free-free emission. Excluding
excitation by a shock, this higher [O III] emission in the nebula
outskirts might be attributed to density clumps.
5.3 Electron density from mid-infrared line ratios
The mid-IR lines of [S III] can be used for electron density diagnos-
tics in a nebula. In fact, Houck et al. ( 1984 ), Moorwood et al. ( 1980 )
and Mizutani et al. ( 2002 ), and later Smith et al. ( 2009 ), computed
the [S III] 18.7- µm/[S III] 33.5- µm line ratio dependence on the elec-
tron density. They found that this ratio, temperature-independent, is
sensitive to change on the electron density in the range 100 ≤ne≤
104cm−3. Hence, we have derived the [S III] 18.7- µm and 33.5- µm
line fluxes present in the ISOSWS spectrum, positioned approxi-
mately on the nebula centre (Fig. A2). We remind the reader that in
this case background observations are also not available. The two
transitions have measured and dereddened fluxes, as in Table A1.
Interstellar absorption is still important at 18 µm and for this reason
we consider the dereddened values.
The derived line ratio is F(18.7 µm)/F(33.5 µm)=0.74±0.47,
which corresponds to an electron density of ∼250 cm−3. The error
in this ratio is because of the uncertainty in the measured lines and
is derived using the error propagation for independent measures.
Similarly, by using the same line pair present in the IRS spectra on
the central source (in particular, the line at 33.5 µm from the LH
spectrum and the line at 18.7 µm from the SH spectrum), we found
a ratio of 1.45, which corresponds to a density of ∼103cm−3.W e
took into account the difference in areas covered by the LH and
SH modules (11.1 ×22.3 and 4.7 ×11.3 arcsec2, respectively),
rescaling the flux at 33.5 µm by an approximated factor of (4.66)−1.
We note that the electron density estimate from the IRS line pair
is an order of magnitude higher than the values found from the SWS
lines. This might be because the SWS spectra are not background-
subtracted and it might also be because of the larger area of the SWS
slit with respect to the IRS modules: as a consequence, the central
value is averaged with smaller densities far from the centre. Our
estimate is also larger than that of Jim ´enez-Esteban et al. ( 2010 ),
who found an electron density of ∼500 cm−3. The reason for this
could be the fact that they did not correct for extinction, which is
still important at 18.7 µm.
The [O III] 88.4- µm/51.8- µm line pair is a more sensitive indica-
tor of the electron density, with respect to the [S III] 33.5- µm/[S III]
18.7-µm line pair (Houck et al. 1984 ). Using the LWS spectra, we
have determined [O III] 88.4- µm/51.8- µm line ratios at six different
positions on the nebula.
The derived line ratios and electron density estimates are listed
in Table 8. Only in two cases is the ratio just below the low-density
limit of 0.57 (Mizutani et al. 2002 ), and therefore, we provide an
upper limit for the electron density. The low electron density region
coincides with the inner shell (the high-ionized gas, observed also
in the radio domain). We want to highlight the fact that electron
densities estimated with this method must be considered to be up-
per limits, because the ISOspectra were not background-subtracted.
However, these electron densities are still consistent with the mean
value (32 cm−3) found from the radio map (which probes the inner
shell); however, this strongly depends on the geometry assumed
(Section 3.3). We notice that at the stellar position, the electron
density is higher ∼1000 cm−3(from the IRS line ratio) and de-
creases to between ∼250 and ∼100 cm−3next to the inner and
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

1402 C. Agliozzo et al.
Table 8. Line ratios and electron densities.
Slit Size Relative Line pair Line ratio ne
(arcsec)2positiona(arcsec)2(cm−3)
IRS-SH/LH 4.7 ×11.3 0 18.5 µm/33.4 µm1 . 4 5 ∼1000
SWS-901 33 ×20 0 18.5 µm/33.4 µm0 . 7 4 ∼250
LWS-003 84 ×84 0 51.8 µm/88.4 µm 0.73 150-160
LWS-008 84 ×84 100 W 51.8 µm/88.4 µm0 . 5 5 <100
LWS-014 84 ×84 100 E 51.8 µm/88.4 µm0 . 5 3 <100
LWS-011 84 ×84 200 W 51.8 µm/88.4 µm0 . 6 7 ∼100
LWS-005 84 ×84 200 E 51.8 µm/88.4 µm 1.24 200-300
LWS-007 84 ×84 200 N-E 51.8 µm/88.4 µm1 . 1 5 ∼200
aWith respect to the star’s position.
outer shells, except in the north-east part of the second shell, where
it increases again to ∼200 cm−3.I nf a c t ,i nt h i sr e g i o n ,t h e[ O III]
line is particularly bright, as discussed in Section 5.2. This strength-
ens the indication of high-density ( ne>100 cm−3) clumps in the
vicinity of G79.29 +0.46.
Another pair of lines useful for a diagnostic study is the [Si II]
34.8µmt o[ S III] 33.5 µm line, which indicates changes in the
excitation due to distance from the star (Simpson et al. 2007 ), but
for these lines our SWS data set covers only the central position on
the nebula. However, the resulting ratio is ∼0.21, which is lower
than the diffuse interstellar gas value ( ∼2.5) and instead is a typical
value in the H IIregion (Simpson et al. 2007 ;J i m ´enez-Esteban et al.
2010 ). We note that [Si II] emission is absent in the background-
subtracted spectrum from the IRS taken along the nebula.
We point out that this diagnostics is limited not only by the fact
that the ISOspectra are not background-subtracted, but also by the
uncertainty of AV. However, we can exclude much higher values
forAV(such as the value determined from the IR central object,
i.e. 18.6) than 5.6; in fact, we have found that AV=18.6 leads to
electron densities (from the mid-IR lines) of the order of ∼105cm−3,
not expected in LBV nebulae. In contrast, the values found in the
spectroscopic analysis give an indication that the visual extinction
for the nebula cannot be more diverse than the assumed value of
5.6.
6 MODELLING THE NEBULA WITH CLOUD Y
Based on the physical parameters derived in our analysis, we have
modelled the nebula around G79.29 +0.49 with the photoionization
code CLOUDY version c10.01, last described by Ferland et al. ( 1998 ).
Almost all the assumptions for the model are derived from the
observations and this has allowed us to adopt a simple method for
the computation of the SED.
The first assumption is that the radiation that illuminates the
nebula arises from a blackbody with a temperature between 18 500
and 20 400 K (consistent with a spectral type B2-B1, as derived in
Section 3.4). The distance adopted is 1.7 kpc. The geometry for the
nebula is spherical: based on the radio observations, it is a shell with
an inner radius of 0.66 pc. A single shell is assumed. The density
is constant within the Str ¨omgren radius and then decreases with a
law∝r−3. Abundances are chosen as solar. Dust grains are assumed
to be composed of both graphite and silicate and are described by
a power-law distribution (Mathis, Rumpl & Nordsieck 1977 ). By
default, the grains are resolved into 10 size bins. The filling factor
is assumed as unity. Cosmic rays are included.
The free parameters are the stellar luminosity, which has to range
between about 105and 106.3L⊙(consistent with typical valuesfor LBVs), the grain abundance and the blackbody temperature (in
the range mentioned above). Therefore, we computed several grids
of models and stopped each computation once a nebular mass of
1.53 M ⊙was reached (according to our estimation). Keeping in
mind the allowed range for the physical parameters as estimated
in this work, we changed them, proceeding by iteration in order to
explain the observations. In particular, first we set the blackbody
to 20 000 K and varied the hydrogen density (approximated to the
electron density, which could range between ∼30 and 200 cm−3,
according to our diagnostics). Starting from the lowest electron
density, the first value that fits the radio flux density is then set (in
fact, the dust emission was found to be weakly dependent on the
assumed density with respect to the radio). Therefore, we varied
the grain abundances and the stellar luminosity in order to fit the
FIR and mid-IR observations, respectively. Finally, we adjusted the
blackbody temperature and the hydrogen density in order also to
obtain the best model for the mid-IR spectra.
The final model is shown in Fig. 6. The measured flux densities
are overlaid. The input and output parameters of the CLOUDY model
are listed in Table 9. As shown in the figure, the model is satisfactory
at the longest wavelengths (e.g. radio and FIR). Note that at 160
µm we provided a lower limit for the flux density (Section 4.2).
Conversely, the continuum mid-IR ( <15µm) does not describe the
data. This can be explained in two ways. In the model, small grains
are absent because they are destroyed by the radiation field. In
reality, they survive because they are shielded by density clumps
(as shown in the maps, the mid-IR emission is clumpy). In support of
this, there is plenty of observational evidence that very small grains
(VSGs) survive within H IIregions (Flagey et al. 2011a ; Paradis et al.
2011 ; Paladini et al. 2012 ) despite theoretical models predicting
depletion or partial destruction of the grains. Recently, the mid-IR
emission of LBV WRA 751 has also been explained as being a
result of grains not in thermal equilibrium (e.g. V oors et al. 2000b ;
Vamvatira-Nakou et al. 2013 ). Otherwise, and this is more likely,
there is a lack of hot dust and the observed photometric flux densities
are mostly a result of the mid-IR lines at wavelengths <15µm, as
predicted by the CLOUDY model. Moreover, the IR continuum in the
IRS spectra (Fig. A5) is very small, even at the longer wavelengths,
suggesting that the observed photometric emission comes from line
transitions. The gas-to-dust ratio in the model is ∼100, which is
still consistent with the value found in Section 4.2.
We have also compared the predicted line ratios with those ob-
served. The considered [O III] lines are collisionally excited and are
sensitive to density. The average observed [O III] 51.80- µm/[O III]
88.33- µm ratio (0.81) is well predicted by the model (0.91). The
[Fe II] 25.98- µm/[S III] 33.47- µm is found to be 0.02 in the model,
two orders of magnitude smaller than the observed value of 0.3.
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

Multiwavelength analysis of the nebula around G79.29 +0.46 1403
Figure 6. Model of the SED and observed flux densities of G79.29 +0.46 from Spitzer ,ISO,WISE ,IRAS ,Herschel and EVLA observations.
Table 9. Model parameters.
Parameter Value
Teff(K) 20 400
D(pc) 1700
log(rin) (cm) 18.3085
log(r in)( p c ) 0 . 6 6
M(M⊙)1 . 5 3
log[L/(L⊙)] 5.4
log(nH)( c m−3)2 . 1 3
Te(K) 5800
Gas/dust 99
To understand this discrepancy, we have obtained a grid of models
by varying the blackbody temperature and we have found that the
[Fe II] line is controlled by the ionization field and not by abun-
dances. The [Fe II] 25.98- µm line is very common in PDRs, and
therefore we suspect that it arises from a layer further out than the
ionized gas. Another interesting finding is that the ratio of [Ne II]
12.81- µm/[Ne III] 15.55- µm observed in the centre of the nebula is
2.2, while the model predicts a higher ratio ( ∼700), because the
photons are not sufficiently energetic to cause [Ne III] transitions.
This strongly suggests that the presence of collisional excitation
produces both the [Ne II]a n d[ N e III] transitions.
Line emission of [O I] 63.18 µm is not predicted by the model.
Therefore, the observed lines in the LWS spectra are very probably
of interstellar origin.
As a result of the model, the average electron temperature is
5800 K. The main heating process is photoelectric and the tem-
perature of graphite grains over radius varies from 90 K (at the
inner radius) to 57 K (at the outer radius), while for silicate grains it
varies from 73 to 53 K. These values are consistent with our average
estimates from the FIR images (see Table 7).Finally, the derived stellar luminosity, log( L/L⊙)=5.4, is con-
sistent with the value provided by different authors (from 5 to 6;
e.g. Waters et al. 1996 ; V oors et al. 2000a ) and with that of galactic
LBVs (Humphreys & Davidson 1994 ).
The proposed model is based on the assumption that the nebula
is a single shell, while the morphology clearly shows that it consists
of multiple shells. However, because the bulk of the determined
mass is distributed within the inner shell (at least 98 per cent), this
simplifying assumption does not affect the model results. To verify
this, we have also modelled multiple shells, by considering first
the mass contained in the inner shell and giving the transmitted
continuum in output as the incident radiation field for the second
shell. We have found good agreement with the simple model.
The neutral mass, probably distributed in the outer shell, has not
been taken into account in the total mass computation. Considering
this, the total mass could be higher, as well as the gas-to-dust ratio. A
similar model, with the same luminosity and effective temperature
for the star, can still explain the observations up to a mass of 5 M ⊙
with proper adjustment of the gas-to-dust ratio.
7 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
We have proposed a multiwavelength analysis of the nebula around
the cLBV G79.29 +0.46 by considering data in a wide spectral range
(from the radio to the mid-IR). The aim of this work was to explain
all the observed properties under the same hypothesis and to provide
a comprehensive picture of the nebular properties.
We can summarize our findings as follows.
(i) Radio observations and the model obtained with the code
CLOUDY have allowed us to constrain the physical parameters of
the star, which has a luminosity of ∼105.4L⊙and an effective
temperature of 20.4 ×103K.
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

1404 C. Agliozzo et al.
(ii) The star is currently losing mass through stellar winds (as
found by an analysis of the central object spectral index) with a rate
of
1.4×10−6/parenleftbiggv∞
110 km s−1/parenrightbigg/parenleftbiggD
1.7 kpc/parenrightbigg3/2
f1/2M⊙yr−1.
(iii) An analysis of the IR emission of the central object reveals
that the star is surrounded by a close dusty envelope with a temper-
ature in the range ∼40 to∼1200 K.
(iv) At a distance of 0.66 pc, there is a detached shell of optical
thin ionized gas, which emits for free-free encounters. The ionized
mass is ∼1.51 M ⊙and the average density is 32 cm−3.
(v) Almost co-spatial with the radio emission (Paper I), there is
a component emitting in the mid-IR, which is very likely a result
of line transitions (He II,[ N e II], [Ne III]) as found in this work. If a
component of hot ( T∼340-550 K) thermal dust is present, it has a
negligible mass. We exclude the presence of non-thermal dust.
(vi) A component of warm ( T∼60-85 K) grains is distributed
in three concentric shells and has a total mass of ∼0.02 M ⊙(in the
case of mixed grains of silicate and graphite).
(vii) No cool dust is evident in the FIR images.
(viii) The IR spectra show the presence of a PDR, very likely
distributed further out than the ionized region, but the considered
data sets do not allow us to evaluate the contribution of the interstel-
lar material. The electron density in the second shell is lower than
∼100 cm−3, with the exception of the outer region in the north-east,
where the density is higher ( ∼200 cm−3). This region corresponds
to the radio spur-emission, first detected by Higgs et al. ( 1994 )a n d
present also in our radio maps. The spectral index analysis of this
region also gives evidence of the presence of density clumps. These
clumps can be explained as a region modified by the impact of the
ejecta with the local environment.
(ix) The gas-to-dust ratio in the nebula is ≈80+(Mneutral(M ⊙)/
0.02).
The nebula morphology suggests that the star has lost mass in at
least three different episodes. As already reported in Paper I, two
of these occurred about 5.4 ×104and 2.7 ×104yr ago (assuming
an expansion velocity of the shell of ∼30 km s−1; Waters et al.
1996 ) and now we indicate an intermediate episode of 4.0 ×104yr.
Considering these epochs, the current mass loss does not explain
the mass contained in the nebula. Assuming a linear expansion, this
rate would have produced, in fact, a nebula with a mass of about a
few 10−2M⊙(i.e. two orders of magnitude less massive than the
value determined from the observations). This implies that a higher
mass-loss rate took place to form such a massive nebula and this is
consistent with changes expected in the rate of mass loss for LBVs
and observed in the case of AG Car.
After examining IRAS images, Waters et al. ( 1996 )h a v er e -
ported that the nebulae were ejected with a mass-loss rate of
∼5×10−4M⊙yr−1. By considering the nebular mass estimated
in this work, we suggest instead a rate of ∼6.5×10−5M⊙yr−1,
which is consistent with many galactic LBVs. Mass-loss rates of the
order of ∼10−5M⊙yr−1have been derived by Groh et al. ( 2009 )
for AG Car, by Najarro et al. ( 2009 ) for the Pistol star and FMM362
and by Clark et al. ( 2003 ) for G24.73 +0.69. Higher mass-loss rates
(greater than ∼10−4M⊙yr−1) have been determined for the more
luminous ηCar (Hillier et al. 2001 ), AFGL 2298 (Clark et al.
2009 ) and G26.47 +0.02 (Umana et al. 2012 ). Lower mass-loss
rates ( ∼10−6M⊙yr−1) have also been observed in a few cases,
such as W243 (Ritchie et al. 2009 ), Wra 17-96 (Egan et al. 2002 )
and HD162685 (Umana et al. 2010 ).In the computation of the total nebular mass, we have not con-
sidered the contribution of the neutral gas. Therefore, our estimates
of the nebular mass and the average mass-loss rate must be consid-
ered to be lower limits. However, the discrepancy with Waters et al.
(1996 ) is probably mostly a result of the difference in the ionized
mass determined in previous works with respect to our estimate. In
fact, the mass determined in this work is at least four times smaller
than the mass computed by Higgs et al. ( 1994 ). A massive nebula,
such as proposed previously, would be comparable in mass to the
Homunculus nebula around ηCar, although G79.29 +0.46 is less
luminous, and consequently less massive, than ηCar. While the dif-
ference between the high nebular mass around G79.29 +0.46 and its
initial mass would have fascinating implications for massive stellar
evolution, the ejecta mass estimated in this work appears to be in
agreement with a low-luminosity massive star.
G79.29 +0.46 is still considered a cLBV because it does not match
the variability criteria. However, indirect evidence for changes in
the mass-loss rates has been pointed out. Indeed, it could be a LBV
in the quiescent that has suffered at least three events of higher mass
loss over the last 5.4 ×104yr.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the anonymous referee for useful comments that have
helped to improve the manuscript. This paper is part of the PhD
thesis of CA, who is very grateful to her tutors for supervising her
PhD work. CA also thanks the Spitzer Science Center/Infrared Pro-
cessing and Analysis Center staff at Caltech for the support provided
during her visit to complete this project. She would especially like
to thank Roberta Paladini for the invaluable suggestions received
during her PhD programme.
This work is based on observations performed at the National Ra-
dio Astronomy Observatory, a facility of the National Science Foun-
dation operated under cooperative agreement by Associated Uni-
versities, Inc. Herschel is a European Space Agency (ESA) space
observatory with science instruments provided by the European-led
Principal Investigator consortia and with important participation
from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
This research has also made use of the NASA/IPAC Infrared Sci-
ence Archive, which is operated by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
California Institute of Technology, under contract with NASA. The
ISOwas an ESA project with instruments funded by ESA Member
States (especially the PI countries, France, Germany, the Nether-
lands and the UK) and with the participation of ISAS and NASA. Fi-
nally, this publication makes use of data products from the 2MASS,
which is a joint project of the University of Massachusetts and
the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center/California Institute of
Technology, funded by NASA and the National Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
Albacete Colombo J. F., Flaccomio E., Micela G., Sciortino S., Damiani F.,
2007, A&A, 464, 211
Bernard J.-P. et al., 2010, A&A, 518, L88
Chugai N. N., Danziger I. J., 2003, Astron. Lett., 29, 649
Clark J. S., Egan M. P., Crowther P. A., Mizuno D. R., Larionov V . M.,
Arkharov A., 2003, A&A, 412, 185
Clark J. S., Larionov V . M., Arkharov A., 2005, A&A, 435, 239
Clark J. S., Crowther P. A., Larionov V . M., Steele I. A., Ritchie B. W.,
Arkharov A. A., 2009, A&A, 507, 1555
Conti P. S., Frost S. A., 1976, BAAS, 8, 340
Dayal A., Hoffmann W. F., Bieging J. H., Hora J. L., Deutsch L. K., Fazio
G. G., 1998, ApJ, 492, 603
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

Multiwavelength analysis of the nebula around G79.29 +0.46 1405
Egan M. P., Clark J. S., Mizuno D. R., Carey S. J., Steele I. A., Price S. D.,
2002, ApJ, 572, 288
Emerson D. T., Graeve R., 1988, A&A, 190, 353
Ferland G. J., Korista K. T., Verner D. A., Ferguson J. W., Kingdon J. B.,
Verner E. M., 1998, PASP, 110, 761
Flagey N., Boulanger F., Noriega-Crespo A., Paladini R., Montmerle T.,
Carey S. J., Gagn ´e M., Shenoy S., 2011a, A&A, 531, A51
Flagey N., Noriega-Crespo A., Billot N., Carey S. J., 2011b, ApJ, 741, 4
Giannini T., Nisini B., Lorenzetti D., 2001, ApJ, 555, 40
Groh J. H., Hillier D. J., Damineli A., Whitelock P. A., Marang F., Rossi C.,
2009, ApJ, 698, 1698
Gvaramadze V . V ., Kniazev A. Y ., Fabrika S., 2010, MNRAS, 405, 1047
Hanson M. M., 2003, ApJ, 597, 957
Higgs L. A., Wendker H. J., Landecker T. L., 1994, A&A, 291, 295
Hillier D. J., Davidson K., Ishibashi K., Gull T., 2001, ApJ, 553, 837
Hora J. et al., 2007, Spitzer Proposal ID 40184
Houck J. R., Shure M. A., Gull G. E., Herter T., 1984, ApJ, 287, L11
Humphreys R. M., Davidson K., 1994, PASP, 106, 1025
Izumiura H., Waters L. B. F. M., de Jong T., Loup C., Bontekoe T. R., Kester
D. J. M., 1997, A&A, 323, 449
Jim´enez-Esteban F. M., Rizzo J. R., Palau A., 2010, ApJ, 713, 429
Kotak R., Vink J. S., 2006, A&A, 460, L5
Kraemer K. E. et al., 2010, AJ, 139, 2319
Lamers H. J. G. L. M., Nota A., Panagia N., Smith L. J., Langer N., 2001,
ApJ, 551, 764
Leitherer C., Robert C., 1991, ApJ, 377, 629
Mathis J. S., 1990, ARA&A, 28, 37
Mathis J. S., Rumpl W., Nordsieck K. H., 1977, ApJ, 217, 425
Mizutani M., Onaka T., Shibai H., 2002, A&A, 382, 610
Moorwood A. F. M., Baluteau J.-P., Anderegg M., Fitton B., Coron N.,
Biraud Y ., 1980, ApJ, 238, 565
Morris P. W. et al., 1999, Nature, 402, 502
Morris P. W. Spitzer WRRINGS Team, 2008, in Bresolin F., Crowther P. A.,
Puls J., eds, Proc. IAU Symp. 250, Massive Stars as Cosmic Engines.
Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, p. 361
Najarro F., Figer D. F., Hillier D. J., Geballe T. R., Kudritzki R. P., 2009,
ApJ, 691, 1816
Naz´e Y ., Rauw G., Hutsem ´ekers D., 2012, A&A, 538, A47
Ofek E. O. et al., 2013, Nature, 494, 65
Paladini R. et al., 2012, ApJ, 760, 149
Panagia N., 1973, AJ, 78, 929
Panagia N., Felli M., 1975, A&A, 39, 1
Paradis D., Paladini R., Noriega-Crespo A., Lagache G., Kawamura A.,
Onishi T., Fukui Y ., 2011, ApJ, 735, 6
Ritchie B. W., Clark J. S., Negueruela I., Najarro F., 2009, A&A, 507, 1597
Rizzo J. R., Jim ´enez-Esteban F. M., Ortiz E., 2008, ApJ, 681, 355
Schneider N., Bontemps S., Simon R., Jakob H., Motte F., Miller M., Kramer
C., Stutzki J., 2006, A&A, 458, 855
Simpson J. P., Colgan S. W. J., Cotera A. S., Erickson E. F., Hollenbach
D. J., Kaufman M. J., Rubin R. H., 2007, ApJ, 670, 1115
Smith N., Gehrz R. D., Hinz P. M., Hoffmann W. F., Hora J. L., Mamajek
E. E., Meyer M. R., 2003, AJ, 125, 1458
Smith N. et al., 2007, ApJ, 666, 1116Smith J. D. T., Rudnick L., Delaney T., Rho J., Gomez H., Kozasa T., Reach
W., Isensee K., 2009, ApJ, 693, 713
Stahl O., Jankovics I., Kov ´acs J., Wolf B., Schmutz W., Kaufer A., Rivinius
T., Szeifert T., 2001, A&A, 375, 54
Tielens A. G. G. M., Hollenbach D., 1985, ApJ, 291, 722
Torres-Dodgen A. V ., Carroll M., Tapia M., 1991, MNRAS, 249, 1
Trams N. R., V oors R. H. M., Waters L. B. F. M., 1998, Ap&SS, 255, 195
Trams N. R., van Tuyll C. I., V oors R. H. M., de Koter A., Waters L. B.
F. M., Morris P. W., 1999, in Wolf B., Stahl O., Fullerton A. W., eds,
Lecture Notes in Physics V ol. 523, Variable and Non-spherical Stellar
Winds in Luminous Hot Stars. Springer, Berlin, p. 71
Umana G., Buemi C. S., Trigilio C., Hora J. L., Fazio G. G., Leto P., 2009,
ApJ, 694, 697
Umana G., Buemi C. S., Trigilio C., Leto P., Hora J. L., 2010, ApJ, 718,
1036
Umana G., Buemi C. S., Trigilio C., Leto P., Agliozzo C., Ingallinera A.,
Noriega-Crespo A., Hora J. L., 2011, ApJ, 739, L11 (Paper I)
Umana G. et al., 2012, MNRAS, 427, 2975
Vamvatira-Nakou C., Hutsem ´ekers D., Royer P., Naz ´e Y ., Magain P., Exter
K., Waelkens C., Groenewegen M. A. T., 2013, A&A, 557, A20
Van Dyk S. D., 2013, AJ, 145, 118
van Genderen A. M., 2001, A&A, 366, 508
van Loon J. T. et al., 2010, AJ, 139, 68
Vink J. S., de Koter A., 2002, A&A, 393, 543
Vink J. S., de Koter A., Kotak R., 2008a, in de Koter A., Smith L. J., Waters
L. B. F. M., eds, ASP Conf. Ser. V ol. 388, Mass Loss from Stars and the
Evolution of Stellar Clusters. Astron. Soc. Pac., San Francisco, p. 47
Vink J. S., Drew J. E., Steeghs D., Wright N. J., Martin E. L., G ¨ansicke
B. T., Greimel R., Drake J., 2008b, MNRAS, 387, 308
V oors R. H. M., Geballe T. R., Waters L. B. F. M., Najarro F., Lamers
H. J. G. L. M., 2000a, A&A, 362, 236
V oors R. H. M. et al., 2000b, A&A, 356, 501
Wachter S., Mauerhan J., van Dyk S., Hoard D. W., Morris P., 2011, Bull.
Soc. R. Sci. Li `ege, 80, 291
Waters L. B. F. M., Izumiura H., Zaal P. A., Geballe T. R., Kester D. J. M.,
Bontekoe T. R., 1996, A&A, 313, 866
Wendker H. J., Molthagen K., Heske A., Higgs L. A., Landecker T. L., 1998,
Ap&SS, 255, 187
Wright E. L. et al., 2010, AJ, 140, 1868
APPENDIX A: INFRARED SPECTRA
Figs A1andA2show the position of the Spitzer and ISO slits,
respectively, superimposed on the 24- µmSpitzer image. Fig. A3
shows all the LWS spectra, taken at different positions on the neb-
ula. Fig. A4contains the most significant emission lines detected
by the SWS positioned at the nebula’s centre. The IRS background-
subtracted spectra are shown in Fig. A5. Finally, Tables A1-A5
list the line flux measurements before and after the extinction
correction.
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

1406 C. Agliozzo et al.
Figure A1. MIPS/ Spitzer 24-µm image of G79.29 +0.46 and the positions
of the IRS SH and LH/ Spitzer (centre) and IRS SL/ Spitzer (nebula) slits.
Figure A2. MIPS/ Spitzer 24-µm image of G79.29 +0.46 and the positions
of the LWS/ ISO(green) and SWS/ ISO(yellow) slits.Figure A3. LWS spectra taken at six different positions on the nebula (three
on the first shell and three on the second shell).
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

Multiwavelength analysis of the nebula around G79.29 +0.46 1407
Figure A4. ISO SWS spectra taken on the star’s position as shown in
Fig.A2. We do not show the [Si II] 34.81- µm line because it is affected by
fringing.Figure A5. IRS SL (CH0), SH (CH1) and LH (CH3) spectra after the
background subtraction. Data were taken on the star’s position (SL and SH)
and on the nebula (LH) as shown in Fig. A1.
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

1408 C. Agliozzo et al.
Table A1. SWS line fluxes.
λcent λlab Element Transition Fobserved Fdereddened No.
(µm) ( µm) (10−19Wc m−2)( 1 0−19Wc m−2)
12.8121 12.8135 [Ne II]2 P ( 1 /2)-2P(3 /2) 1.05 ±0.02 3.2 ±0.4 sws69200901
18.7123 18.7130 [S III] 3P2-3P1 1.5 ±0.1 4.6 ±0.6 sws76802901
33.4780 33.4810 [S III] 3P1-3P0 5.4 ±0.1 6.2 ±0.2 sws76802901
34.8128 34.8152 [Si II]2 P ( 3 /2)-2P(1 /2) 1.3 ±0.3 1.3 ±0.1 sws51705105
Table A2. Line fluxes derived from the LWS spectra, obtained at six different positions of the slit on the nebula.
λcent λlab Element Transition Fobserved Fdereddened No.
(µm) ( µm) (10−19Wc m−2)( 1 0−19Wc m−2)
51.8333 51.8145 [O III] 3P2-3P1 20.1 ±3.6 28.2 ±4.8 lws35801011
51.8191 30.8 ±4.4 55 ±5 lws35801007
51.7381 38.7 ±5.5 46 ±6 lws35801005
51.8234 29.6 ±2.4 32.6 ±3.7 lws35801014
51.8471 26 ±2 28.5 ±3.1 lws35801008
51.8221 34.4 ±3.4 38.8 ±3.4 lws35801003
63.1785 63.1837 [O I] (3P1-3P2) 4.6 ±0.8 4.6 ±1.4 lws35801011
63.1785 3.9 ±0.3 3.3 ±1.8 lws35801007
63.2027 3.7 ±0.8 4.1 ±1.1 lws35801005
63.1774 5.1 ±1.2 5.3 ±1.1 lws35801014
63.1734 5.3 ±1.8 5.4 ±2.0 lws35801008
63.1870 3.3 ±0.3 4.7 ±2.3 lws35801003
88.4118 88.3560 [O III] (3P1-3P0) 40.8 ±2.7 42 ±3 lws35801011
88.3803 43.05 ±1.46 47.7 ±5.7 lws35801007
88.3960 35 ±2 37.2 ±3.6 lws35801005
88.3734 59.4 ±5.1 61.5 ±6.1 lws35801014
88.4099 51.2 ±1.8 51.7 ±4.2 lws35801008
88.3817 52.2 ±1.1 53 ±3 lws35801003
122.1056 121.898 [N II] (3P2-3P1) 8 ±18 . 4 ±2.3 lws35801011
122.0106 3.6 ±1.2 4.4 ±1.5 lws35801007
121.6556 4.7 ±1.7 5.1 ±1.8 lws35801005
121.9799 12.5 ±1.5 12.9 ±2.2 lws35801014
121.9589 14.2 ±2.5 15 ±2 lws35801008
121.9886 8.79 ±0.76 10.0 ±1.6 lws35801003
157.7338 157.741 [C II]2 P ( 3 /2)-2P(1 /2) 17.6 ±0.1 18.1 ±2.2 lws35801011
157.7237 15.01 ±0.35 15.2 ±1.7 lws35801007
157.7191 18.0 ±1.5 18.6 ±1.6 lws35801005
157.7185 20.2 ±0.6 20.7 ±1.6 lws35801014
157.7289 18.7 ±1.2 19.9 ±2.8 lws35801008
157.7207 17.2 ±0.4 17.5 ±1.7 lws35801003
Table A3. Line fluxes derived from the IRS/SL spectrum, after the background subtraction.
λlab λcent Element Transition Fobserved Fdereddened
(µm) ( µm) (10−21Wc m−2)( 1 0−21Wc m−2)
7.4568 7.4526 He II 12-10 962 ±160 (2.5 ±1.4)×103
12.2485 12.3635 He II 25-17 118.9 ±29.6 485.7 ±23.3
12.8135 12.8070 [Ne II]2 P ( 1 /2)-2P(3 /2) 82.9 ±10.7 135.3 ±105.8
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

Multiwavelength analysis of the nebula around G79.29 +0.46 1409
Table A4. Line fluxes derived from the IRS/SH spectrum, after the background subtraction.
λlab λcent Element Transition Fobserved Fdereddened
(µm) ( µm) (10−21Wc m−2)( 1 0−21Wc m−2)
11.3026 11.3025 H I(He II) 23-16 (18-14) 27.8 ±5.6 165.3 ±39.9
12.3669 12.3677 H I(He II) 14-12 (7-6) 65.4 ±14.0 275.5 ±17.7
12.8135 12.8086 [Ne II] 2P1/2-2P3/2 9.9 ±1.5 40.0 ±13.0
15.5551 15.5511 [Ne III] 3P1-3P2 11.6 ±3.4 17.9 ±3.2
16.2025 16.2009 H I 10-8 10.1 ±2.2 24.0 ±3.6
16.8737 16.8760 H I 12-9 4.3 ±1.1 13.2 ±3.7
17.9359 17.9358 [Fe II] a4F7/2-a4F9/2 8.1 ±2.2 24.9 ±7.0
18.7130 18.7085 [S III] 3P2-3P1 14.8 ±1.8 45.6 ±6.1
19.0541 19.0527 H I 8-7 15.5 ±3.6 46.9 ±10.1
Table A5. Line fluxes derived from the IRS/LH spectrum, after the background subtraction.
λlab λcent Element Transition Fobserved Fdereddened
(µm) ( µm) (10−21Wc m−2)( 1 0−21Wc m−2)
22.3316 22.3191 H I(He II) 13-10 (22-18) 24.5 ±7.7 61.9 ±14.2
25.9883 25.9758 [Fe II] a6D7/2-a6D9/2 24.1 ±2.9 42.4 ±15.2
27.0880 27.0756 H I 24-14 7.2 ±1.5 13.3 ±5.3
27.7921 27.7887 H I 9-8 30.7 ±3.3 54.6 ±7.1
33.4810 33.4729 [S III] 3P1-3P0 109.9 ±6.3 146.5 ±5.4
This paper has been typeset from a T EX/LATEX file prepared by the author.
MNRAS 440, 1391-1409 (2014)Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/440/2/1391/1022850 by guest on 11 October 2025

